++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 147, April 2012.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 147 Contents.

01: Apps Risk Creating New World of Exclusion, Report Finds
- “Choice, adaptability and flexibility” essential for
accessibility.

02: Publishers Call for Cohesion on Accessible e-Books
- Supply chain pieces should work together, says report.

03: Digital Exclusion For Older People 'Set To Continue'
- Web designers must address constraints.

News In Brief: 04: Closure Call - technology assessment centre
under threat; 05: One Day - Global Accessibility Awareness;
06: Cosmopolitan Player: - e-learning pioneer profiled.

Section Two: Inbox.
07: Petitions TV Trouble – new text-to-speech TVs create a stir.

Section Three: Opinion
- Entrepreneurship.
+08: Do People With Chronic Conditions Make Great
Entrepreneurs?
Julie Howell, who has lived with multiple sclerosis since the
age of 19, says coping with a chronic condition has made her a
more effective entrepreneur – and others could learn from her
experience.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Apps Risk Creating New World of Exclusion, Report
Finds.

Developers of mobile apps must build in “as much choice,
adaptability and flexibility as possible” to their products to
maximise accessibility for disabled people, or risk creating a
whole new world of digital exclusion, a new report finds.

‘Moving together: mobile apps for inclusion and assistance’ (
http://bit.ly/yBTdwo ) was written by E-Access Bulletin editor
Dan Jellinek with Peter Abrahams of Bloor Research, on
behalf of the OneVoice for Accessible IT Coalition.

The report details a number of key issues facing elderly and
disabled users of mobile apps, and makes recommendations
for improving the accessibility of such apps.

One emerging area in the field is that of apps for assistance
which use ‘crowdsourcing’ to assist users, the report found.
These are apps which draw on the knowledge base of a group
to provide information or help to other users, such as the
iPhone app VizWiz, which allows users to take a photo of
something, record a question about the picture, and then
‘crowdsource’ the answer from a team of online workers.

Speaking to E-Access Bulletin, Peter Abrahams, co-author of
the report, said accessible apps could enable disabled users “to
be independent in ways they could not be in the non-digital
environment.” However, “if the app is not accessible then the
disabled person will be disenfranchised and marginalised. This
is morally, ethically, financially and legally unacceptable”,
Abrahams said.

Mobile device retailers should ensure sales staff have training
in basic disability awareness and use of the Global
Accessibility Reporting Initiative (GARI) database, run by the
Mobile Manufacturers Forum ( http://bit.ly/reiCg ), to provide
customers with accessibility information, the report says.

The report was launched last month at the inaugural Annual
General Meeting of the One Voice for Accessible ICT
Coalition, a collection of private, public and third sector groups
committed to helping businesses and organisations improve
their ICT accessibility. At the meeting, coalition members
signed a set of principles detailing their commitment to
promote and increase the uptake and delivery of accessible
online and mobile services.

The coalition has also drawn-up a ‘Seven Steps’ guide to basic
mobile app accessibility for app designers and implementers:
http://bit.ly/yL8iaZ

All these steps are designed to help overcome the idea that
accessibility is too complicated, Abrahams said. “They also
emphasise the fact that accessibility is not just about getting the
technical coding right, but goes right through the cycle from
commissioning to dealing with feedback.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=716 .


+02: Publishers Call for Cohesion on Accessible e-Books.

A pledge on behalf of the publishing industry to work with all
parts of the publishing supply chain to improve the
accessibility of e-books has been launched by The Publishers
Association (PA), with cross-sector support.

The joint statement ( http://bit.ly/HzaaBV ) was launched at this
week’s London Book Fair 2012, and is supported by a range of
organisations, including: the Royal National Institute of Blind
People; and EDItEUR, the international trade standards body
for the book industry.

While technological advancements have made it easier for
publishers to produce material that is more accessible to those
with print impairments, the whole supply chain now needs to
work together to advance e-book accessibility, the statement
says.

“The mechanisms by which an ebook is made accessible
involve all the actors in the supply chain from author to reader;
no single actor in that chain can solve the challenge of
accessibility by itself. Publishers, ebook device manufacturers,
platform developers, ebook wholesalers and retailers, and of
course consumers themselves all have their part to play”, it
says.

Publishers are now looking to work with: developers of e-book
devices and platforms; e-book retailers; learning providers and
libraries; and readers with print impairments.

The PA is asking organisations in all parts of the publishing
supply chain, and others interested organisations, to pledge
their support to the statement, which they can do through the
PA’s website ( http://bit.ly/I7NIfZ ). The association has also
produced its own recommendations on accessible publishing
and text-to-speech ( http://bit.ly/ApJbsd ).

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=714 .


+03: Digital Exclusion For Older People 'Set To Continue'.

Today’s technologically-skilled young people are likely to face
significant web accessibility problems as they grow older,
similar to those faced by elderly computer users today, a
professor of computing has said.

Speaking to E-Access Bulletin ahead of his talk at this week’s
W4A web accessibility conference in Lyon, France (
http://www.w4a.info/2012/ ), Alan F. Newell, an emeritus
professor at Dundee University’s School of Computing, said
that he has “every expectation” that today’s young people will
face problems using the web in the future, even if they
currently have good computer skills. This will arise from their
declining abilities (such as poorer eyesight, poorer cognition,
poorer dexterity) struggling to cope with constant technological
evolution, he said.

To counter these problems web designers must take into
account the challenges that face elderly people – which they
are not currently doing, Newell said. “Design is all about
working to constraints, but web designers don’t see [challenges
faced by elderly people] as a constraint they’re prepared to
tackle.”

To help tackle the problem web designers should meet older
computer users to find out more about the problems they face,
Newell said. This would help designers to create sites that are
used more easily by older people, which, in turn, would
increase usability for everyone, following principles of
universal design, he said.

Although older people are commonly seen as technologically
inept, it is, in fact, the design flaws of the web which make it
unusable by elderly people and other digitally disadvantaged
groups, Newell said.

Drawing on lessons from his book published last year, ‘Design
and the digital divide’, Newell said the issues faced by older
people are different from those faced by younger computer
users with disabilities.

“There has been significant work done on accessibility of
websites for disabled people, but this tends to be focused on
relatively young, highly motivated people with a single
disability, but if you look at older people, they usually have
multiple minor disabilities.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=712 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Closure Call: The British Assistive Technology
Association (BATA) is calling for government support to help
prevent the closure of the ACE Centre, an independent centre
in Oxford providing advice, assessments, assistive technology
recommendations and training to young people and adults with
communication difficulties, and their carers. At a general
meeting in March, it was decided that the ACE Centre would be
forced to close at the end of June due to a lack of funds:

Short link: http://bit.ly/HKsAif


+05: One Day: A Global Accessibility Awareness Day is being
organised through Facebook for 9 May, asking communities
around the world to arrange events that promote digital
accessibility. The concept was inspired by a blog post by web
developer Joe Devon ( http://bit.ly/tYRJNX ), and the group it
has spawned is helping to organise accessibility activities and
demonstrations around the globe, as well as asking people to
try and use their computers on the day without a screen,
without a mouse or without speakers, to give them an insight to
the challenges faced by disabled computer users:

http://www.facebook.com/globalaccessibilityawarenessday/inf
o
Short link: http://on.fb.me/INGlNW


+06: Cosmopolitan Player: Maria Zedda, a UK-based disability
awareness and equality trainer who has helped pioneer the use
of e-learning in her field, has gained the unusual accolade of a
profile in the Italian edition of Cosmopolitan magazine. Zedda,
who is partially deaf, is the training director at Wideaware,
which uses e-learning techniques to help employers and staff
become more aware of disability issues and adhere to legal
requirements:

http://blog.wideaware.co.uk/archive/36/maria-zedda-featured-
on-cosmopolitan-italy
Short link: http://bit.ly/H9lVby

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07:TV Trouble: Nigel Timbrell, a reader who is blind, posted
a comment onto our EAB Live discussion website following
our March story “UK’s First Inbuilt Text-To-Speech TVs Hit
The Shelves”, detailing a move by Panasonic to build text-to-
speech functionality into 30 of its TV models, making them the
first such TVs available on the UK general market.

“It can be only a step in the right direction from Panasonic in
putting in text-to-speech software into their TV sets”, writes
Timbrell. “My concern would be how many people who need
this facility are going to go out and purchase a brand-new TV
set? It would be interesting to see if Panasonic can fit a
component into existing TV sets to enable text-to-speech in our
own TV sets instead of going out to purchase a new one.”

The position is similar with the release of a new talking
Freeview set-top box from RNIB, he says – those people who
have already bought a Freeview box which is not accessible
will be at a disadvantage. “It seems discrimination to those
disabled people who had no choice [but] to make do what was
available at that time, but [are] not allowed to have what is
available today under the similar system.”

Meanwhile another reader, Luca Davanzo, comments on the
same story: “Great news! I wonder if text to speech will be
available for other languages than English, and when... and [it]
would be useful to know the exact TV models with [text to
speech] enabled... any hint?”

[Editor’s note: Nigel Prankard from Panasonic has kindly listed
the Panasonic model ranges which include the text-to-speech
functionality in a comment on the web version of our story –
link at the end, or for a for a direct link to the comment use:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=693%20.#comment-6417
.

With regard to text-to-speech TVs being available in other
languages, Prankard said: “There is no plan to add any
additional languages for our 2012 model range. The problem
with additional languages is the memory required to support the
language library. Panasonic is considering if this can be
addressed in future models. We would like to receive input on
European languages that we should consider for future models.
In addition, we would like to understand if the user would
consider it a problem if they had to download a language via
an SD card into the TV set to replace a default language.”]

Response please by email to inbox@headstar.com or you add
your own comments to this story using the online form at the
foot of the page at:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=693 .

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Opinion
- Entrepreneurship.

+08: Do People With Chronic Conditions Make Great
Entrepreneurs?
By Julie Howell

Consider this: does having a long-term illness have any
advantages?

I’ve been living with multiple sclerosis since age 19. Until
recently, I worked for other people, evangelising about the
many benefits of web accessibility. Following redundancy in
2010, I found myself at another of life’s crossroads. Should I
find another job, or take the road less travelled and start my
own business? I plumped for the latter and I haven’t looked
back.

Recently, I was asked to address a networking meeting
attended by local entrepreneurs. Never having had the desire to
scale a mountain or swim with sharks, some ‘thinking outside
of the box’ was required.

What is ‘good’ about have a chronic condition and are there
any reasons why having a long-term illness might make a
person a good entrepreneur? I came up with seven of them.

1: Illness sets parameters.

One of the hardest things about working for yourself is
learning to focus on your goals without a boss standing over
you. Living with a long-term illness is all about focus –
focusing on what you can do, not what you can’t. Having
periods of ‘down time’ when I cannot work places a premium
on the time when I can work and ‘good time’ is never wasted.

2: We’ve learned to forgive ourselves.

It surprises me how difficult some people find it to forgive
themselves for their mistakes. Business is all about learning
from mistakes and moving on, so if you struggle to forgive
yourself for making a mistake, the chances are you will also
struggle in business. When you live with a chronic condition, a
major feature of which is crippling fatigue, you learn pretty
fast that time and energy spent feeling guilty about it is time
and energy wasted.

3: The 4-hour week is no longer just a dream.

‘Work smarter, not harder’ is the entrepreneurs’ mantra and
they dream of achieving the elusive ‘four-hour working week’.
I joke a little here – many of us with chronic conditions can
only manage four hours of work a week... and you’d be
amazed how much you can pack in when that’s all the time
you have (Parkinson’s Law)! I call this ‘living the dream’.

4: We never waste time.

People procrastinate. I’m sure you’ve worked with someone
who can’t make a decision. Making decisions is something I
find very easy. They may not always be the right decisions but
in business, that’s not what’s important. If you get something
wrong, dust yourself down and try again. Time is a precious
commodity – don’t waste it through indecision.

5: We work hours others won’t.

I work when I’m at my most lucid and alert, which tends to be
in the afternoon and evening. Being happy to work evenings
means I can pick up work others find less convenient.

6: We deflect hurtful remarks.

People let things other people say get to them far too often.
Everyone with a chronic condition has had to deal with stupid
remarks. Learning to deflect crass comments without being
negatively affected by them is important, as time spent
ruminating would be better spent doing just about anything
else.

7: We say ‘no’ without guilt.

Guilt is exhausting. Learning to accept our limitations and say
‘no’, so we can say ‘yes’ more often to the important things, is
just good business sense. If every entrepreneur did the same I
reckon they would be more successful for it.

I bet there are more reasons why people with chronic
conditions can make great entrepreneurs. Isn’t it time to
celebrate what we’re good at and remind ourselves of our
numerous strengths, even – or maybe especially - in the face of
adversity? The entrepreneurs I spoke to seemed inspired: job
done.

NOTE: Julie Howell is Managing Director of Giraffe Sense
Mentoring.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=709

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility
discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our
sixth birthday next month, you’ll find discussion of
accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2012 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 147 ends.]
