++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 145, January 2012.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please recommend this free bulletin to others so they can sign
up to receive their own copy (subscription details at the end).


++Issue 145 Contents.

01: Graphics Formats Holding Back Blind People in Workplace
- New software needed to emboss tables and charts, study
finds.

02: New trial in Spain for accessible medicines app
- Square barcodes on packaging link to growing database.

03: Video Game Communities Could Boost Social Inclusion
- Support groups could focus on disability.

News in Brief: 04: Research Winners - innovators awarded
phase two funding from Small Business Research Initiative; 05:
Potential Views - government disablity strategy consultation;
06: Top Alumnus - Julie Howell wins award; 07: Parliamentary
Briefing - input sought.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Petition Protest - time running out; 09: Read Aloud - Adobe
pdf audio option; 10: Course Revamp - web access revision.

Section Three: Opinion - Access technology.
+11: Is It Best To Go Mainstream?
Special access technologies can be more usable for disabled
people than mainstream technologies, but they bring their own
problems of affordability and support, says Donna Jodhan.
Where does the balance lie?

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Graphics Formats Holding Back Blind People in
Workplace.

Lack of access to information graphics in tactile form is
holding back blind people in the workplace, when the problem
could be tackled by relatively simple software to adapt Braille
printers to produce graphics, according to a report published
this week.

The independent research report, “Touching the world”, is the
product of a two-year specialist fellowship with the Clore
Social Leadership Programme funded by RNIB. Based on
interviews with 12 blind people, the study was carried out by
accessible technology specialist John Ramm, with support from
University of Sussex research fellow Frances Aldrich.

Blind people often come across data at work set in tables,
graphics, charts and other graphical formats but it is extremely
rare to receive such information in tactile form, the report
finds. This means most often they rely on descriptions of
graphics from colleagues or support workers, which creates a
sense of dependency and inequality and are much harder to
use.

“The de facto standard at the minute for anything graphical
seems to be to write a description of it, which to me is a really
feeble attempt at best, because the whole reason for putting it
into a graphic in the first place is it makes it easier for people to
grasp the big picture,” Ramm told E-Access Bulletin. “Then I
have to reconstruct in my head, I can’t just read off
information.”

Ironically, in the days before widespread computing when
Braille materials were produced manually from steel embossing
sheet, the situation for graphics was better because they could
be embossed onto the same sheets, he said. More recently
Braille production has become automated, with machines
outputting it directly from software, but the issue of graphics
appears to have been overlooked.

The answer is to develop new software and standards which
use automated Braille dots in freer formats to build graphics
alongside character cells, Ramm said. “If you have a pie chart
and it is only a rudimentary circle shape, that’s fine. For the
purposes of a pie chart, it doesn’t really matter, all your want to
know is how things split up.”

He said tables could be produced more easily in Braille if there
were better ways to abbreviate numbers and put the data into
columns. “What most of these bits of software they don’t even
try to do anything graphical with tables – they make each row
as a new paragraph, with no attempt to recreate columns at all.
It’s pointless.”

The study finds some blind people may currently be deterred
from applying for some jobs altogether because of the
difficulty in accessing tables and charts. One participant said:
“I am very put off jobs where I think the content is going to be
quite graphical... That would actually make a decision for me,
probably, because I think it adds another layer of need for
assistance.”

Ultimately however, blind employees may have to resort to
legal action to force through equal provision, the study says.

“It is quite possible that some test discrimination cases could be
brought to show employers, universities, training institutions
and others that the vague verbal descriptions are just not
sufficient alternative provision when those who can see have a
diagram in front of them,” it says.

“There is a serious disconnect between the colourful, varied,
eye-catching, multimedia world of printed material and the
bland, text-based, serial Braille material which blind people
receive – if they get anything at all.”

The Clore Social Leadership Programme aims to develop
aspiring leaders in the social sector through fellowships of up
to two years. To download a copy of the new report visit:
http://www.cloresocialleadership.org.uk/john-ramm

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=688 .


+02: New trial in Spain for accessible medicines app.

A major new trial in Spain using mobile devices to make
prescription medicine information more accessible has been
approved by the project’s partners including charities,
pharmaceutical industry representatives and government
bodies.

The "Accessible Medicine” project will use two-dimensional
Data Matrix square barcodes placed on medicine boxes and
packaging allowing people to use an application or “app”
running on a smartphone or other mobile device with a camera
to link to detailed medicine information online. The
information can then be spoken aloud or conveyed in other
formats on the mobile device according to user needs and
preferences.

The project is being led by Vodafone Spain Foundation with a
range of partners including Technosite, the trading and research
arm of Spanish national blindness charity ONCE; and the
Spanish Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and
Associations (FARMAINDUSTRIA).

The partners say beneficiaries of the system will include not
only blind people and people with impaired vision but also
people who have difficulties handling the small folded leaflets
currently issued with medicines.

The new trial has been approved following successful phase
one trials ending last year. Developments for phase two include
expansion of the online drug database from five to the 30 most
commonly-used medicines; and improvements to the design
interface.

Alongside the trials, ONCE is working with the Spanish Agency
of Medicine and Health Products to create a database with
accessible information on all available medicines.

According to the phase one report, the system has possible
applications in other fields such as information about food and
clothing. More information can be found in Spanish only at the
project’s website:
http://www.medicamentoaccesible.es

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=686 .


+03: Video Game Communities Could Boost Social Inclusion.

Online communities built around popular video games could
help build social inclusion for disadvantaged groups including
disabled people, a digital games expert involved in a new
European research project told E-Access Bulletin.

The Digital Games for Empowerment and Inclusion (DGEI)
research project, funded by the European Commission, held its
first meeting in Seville last month. The project aims to examine
uses of digital games for social purposes such as health,
training, education, social inclusion and other public services –
so-called “serious games”. After the researching the current
state of play it aims to develop an action plan to help realise
games’ social potential.

However the use of games for social benefit is wider than
simply the use of gaming techniques to create “serious games”
with a social or educational purpose, says Scott Colfer, project
manager of internet channel Young Dads TV (
http://www.youngdads.tv/ ) and participant in the Seville event.

He told E-Access Bulletin there was big untapped potential in
building support communities around existing popular games,
which already feature online player communities.

“The big computer games have a budget bigger than a large
motion picture,” Colfer said. “It’s hard to match that, so it
might be better to see how communities around games can be
used.” One model might be the UK-based group GamerDads, a
group of young fathers who set up their own online community
to play games online (http://www.gamerdads.co.uk/ ), Colfer
said.

“They were tired of playing in normal gamer groups where if
you leave during a game, it’s frowned on. But they may have
to leave the game because they are looking after their kids.”
From coming together as gamers, the group had developed into
one of the largest online communities of fathers, and members
were offering each other informal support outside the gaming
sphere, he said.

“Now they work on other things together, they support a
particular charity, and they do it all themselves, there’s no
government input.” Similar communities could work well for
disabled gamers, Colfer said.

For more on the European project, see:
http://is.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pages/EAP/eInclusion/games.html


- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=684 .


++News in Brief:

+ 04: Research Winners: Four technology innovators have been
awarded phase two funding of £500,000 from the
government’s Small Business Research Initiative (SBRI) to
progress their ideas from ‘proof of concept’ to prototype stage,
with a view to bringing full products to market. The four are:
Gamelab, to use Microsoft Kinect gesture recognition
technology to produce games, training and support applications
which help people communicate more naturally;
Technabling, for a portable sign-language-to-text translator
capable of working with a handheld camera-enabled devices
such as smart phones and tablet PCs;
iansyst, to lead a consortium developing “MyDocStore”, a
multi-platform document conversion and management tool
using cloud, desktop and mobile techniques to create
accessible transfer and conversion of files; and
System Associates, for Navitext, a portable software
application adding accessibility enhancements to documents in
any format:
http://www.jisctechdis.ac.uk/techdis/news/detail/2012/SBRI
Short link: http://bit.ly/xTD9q5 .


05: Potential Views: Consultation on a new cross-government
disability strategy to be published this spring is now live,
hosted by the UK Office for Disability Issues. The strategy,
“Fulfilling potential”, sets out areas for discussion based on
three key principles: realising aspirations; individual control;
and changing attitudes and behaviours. Comments can be
submitted until 9 March 2012:
http://odi.dwp.gov.uk/odi-projects/fulfilling-potential.php
Short link: http://bit.ly/tcQbNH .


+06: Top Alumnus: The web accessibility campaigner and
online health pioneer Julie Howell has been named “Alumnus
of the year 2012” by the University of Brighton. The award
recognises outstanding community involvement, personal
achievement and philanthropy as well as professional success.
Howell’s cited achievements included the Jooly's Joint website,
a support community used by 60,000 people with multiple
sclerosis, and her work as a mentor with the university’s
Momentum scheme for student mentoring. She was also the
RNIB’s first website editor and became Disability Rights
Campaigner for the charity before writing the first British
Standards Specification for web design (PAS 78). Her current
work includes social media training for small businesses:
http://www.brighton.ac.uk/news/2012/110112alumnus_award.
php?PageId=810
Short link: http://bit.ly/yphBzy .


+07: Parliamentary Briefing: A policy briefing for MPs and
Lords on ICT for disabled people is being compiled by the
Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology (POST), and
input is invited from our readers. POST provides Parliament
with impartial advice, and its new briefing will summarise the
major issues in the digital inclusion of disabled people
including key statistics; current policies; barriers to uptake;
accessibility problems; public/private sector initiatives and
research efforts. If anyone would like to submit ideas or
information, please contact Ned Yoxall by email on:
yoxalle@parliament.uk

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Petition Protest: In our last issue David Bates, of the
National Federation of the Blind (NFB) UK, wrote in to say the
government’s official electronic petitions website
(http://epetitions.direct.gov.uk/) was hard for him to use
because a “captcha” audio anti-spam test was hard to hear
clearly.

His message is strongly supported by Pat Onions, a registered
blind person who with a group of disabled people and carers
has launched a petition calling on the government to “Stop and
review the cuts to benefits and services which are falling
disproportionately on disabled people, their carers and
families”:
http://epetitions.direct.gov.uk/petitions/20968 .

Pat writes: “I am only too aware of the huge barriers faced by
not only blind people but, many, many disabled people in
lacking the ability to sign this petition. It is a petition for
disabled people and yet they are excluded completely by their
own disabilities.

“The sounds that I have to listen to are quite inaudible even
with perfect hearing. Together with others with sight loss this
has been taken up with those responsible for the site but their
interest is nil.”

She continues: “I had an email telling me this is a problem
which will be looked at ‘sometime in the future’. Disabled
people are fighting for their lives, under the devastating
destruction of the Welfare Reform Bill and are being totally
denied a platform to show their feelings.

“We do not have time to wait for ‘sometime in the future’. I
know there are tens of thousands who want to sign this
petition. I have written to [Leader of the House of Commons]
Sir George Young but as yet had no reply. Why aren't I
surprised?”

Regular correspondent Brian Gaff, who is on the committee of
the Kingston upon Thames Association for the Blind, writes in
to say he has encountered problems with the same system:
“The average older person with hearing loss as well stands no
chance. I had 10 attempts and never found it would work. I
suspect it’s not me, it’s their system.

“There is a growing problem of lip service as has been
mentioned before. Nobody understands the issues and says
they comply but who actually tests it with a real blind person?”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: Read Aloud: To add to our ongoing discussion of the best
ways to access information held in Adobe pdf files, Norman
Lilly of Forcetenco writes in to say: “There has been for some
time a read aloud option with Adobe.

“If all else fails with your screen reader or importing with your
OCR (optical character recognition) program, you can use this
feature which can be found in the Adobe menu under ‘View’
and the last item which is called ‘Read out loud’. The hot key
is ‘Shift+Ctrl+Y’. It will read all PDFs, even those secured with
128 bit encryption.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: Course Revamp: Further news in response to our
December complaint from Allan Milne about incorrect text
labels on forms used in an online course on web accessibility
launched by charity AbilityNet with the Equality and Human
Rights Commission and BCS (the Chartered Institute for IT).
The BCS now adds: “Thanks for bringing this to our attention
and apologies for the tardy response. We obviously consider
the accessibility of the course and the entire log-in and course
management platform as the highest of priorities.

“The site will be taken down while we undertake a thorough
review. We will of course keep you informed on progress.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Opinion
- Access technology.

+11: Is It Best To Go Mainstream?
by Donna Jodhan.

The topic of which is better – special access technology
designed specifically for use by disabled people, or
mainstream technology that is made accessible and used by
everyone – is very near and dear to my heart.

To put things into perspective: access technology is generally
much more expensive than its mainstream counterpart and
much less available on the market. It can also be extremely
challenging to have access technology repaired, compared with
mainstream technology.

There are far fewer manufacturers of access technology
hardware and far fewer developers of access technology
software, than of mainstream products.

The profit to be made for those who develop and sell access
technology is much less than for those who do the same for
mainstream technology.

Access technology has to be developed in such a way as to
adapt to the mainstream world.

Those are the key issues. Now, where do we go from here?

About 18 months ago, I bought a PDA (personal digital
assistant) that was developed for blind people; a real find for
me and one that I found to be really forward thinking because
of its features. A few weeks ago, I was told that this PDA will
no longer be manufactured and as of June 2012, no more
hardware maintenance agreements would be available.
Accessories will still be available as long as supplies last. That
was quite a shock and now we are all left holding the bag, so to
speak.

I am not going to identify the manufacturers of this wonderful
product but suffice it to say that it has made me rethink how I
go about choosing my mobile devices. Do I continue to buy
access technology that is extremely expensive and one that I
am not sure will be around for too long? Or do I move towards
the mainstream world?

Do I expose myself to heartbreak if I continue to buy these
pieces of access technology only to learn that in a short space
of time they are off the market and no more supplies of
accessories or support is no longer available? Should we as
blind people continue to put up with such factors as
unaffordability, unavailability, and inadequate support? Or is it
time for us to start embracing the world of Apple and thank the
late Steve Jobs for having taken that big step to make all of his
devices like the iPad and iPhone accessible to us?

Android devices are also out there for the exploring, and of
course there are other tablets and mobile devices out there that
are becoming more accessible to us. There are ever more
choices to help us join the mainstream technology world.

The landscape is rapidly changing and who knows for how
long the manufacturers of JAWS Screen Reader, Window-Eyes
and other types of access technology be able to hold on to their
respective turfs? Only time will tell.

NOTE: Donna Jodhan (
http://www.donnajodhan.blogspot.com/ ) is an accessibility
consultant who is involved in an ongoing legal battle with the
Canadian government over accessibility of its websites.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=681 .

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility discussion on the web for nearly six years.
Celebrating our sixth birthday next month, you’ll find
discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2012 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Editorial advisors: Kevin Carey, Tristan Parker.


ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 145 ends.]
