++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 150, July 2012.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 150 Contents.

01: Final Draft of Mandate 376 Set For Review.
- Feedback sought for ICT procurement standard.

02: “Georgie” Apps Make Smartphones Smarter.
- Accessible apps series for Android phones.

03: Dyslexia Spelling Checker Wins Techology4Good Award
- “Talking TVs” commended, Stephen Hawking speaks.

News In Brief: 04: IQ Guidance - developer resource hub; 05:
Improving Interfaces - control system barriers; 06: Pledging
Change - ‘WebSight’ campaign; 07: Job-Share Politics - MP
calls for Parliamentary job-sharing.

Section Two: Inbox.
08: TV Trouble – set top box firm in administration; 09:
Northern Voice – text-to-speech accents; 10: Airline Struggles
– websites still inaccessible; 11: Opera Blocked – request for
digital text denied.

Section Three: Special Report - Paralympics Broadcasting
12: Winning The Accessible Games, Live and Online.
Preparing for broadcasting the 2012 Paralympic Games has
presented Channel 4 with a range of accessibility challenges,
but addressing these issues has bolstered accessibility
throughout the organisation, says Paul Edwards, Channel 4’s
online programme manager for the Paralympics 2012. Tristan
Parker speaks to him.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Final Draft of Mandate 376 Set For Review.

The latest and final draft of a new European Standard for the
accessibility of ICT products and services procured by the
public sector – known as “Mandate 376” – is to be placed
online next week, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

Users, developers, manufacturers, public bodies and procurers
will have until October to offer feedback on the standard and
associated documents before formal work begins on legislation
this autumn.

The work, co-funded by the European Commission, is being
carried out by European standards organisations. It aims to
harmonise accessibility requirements for public procurement of
ICT across Europe, and to provide a set of tools for the use of
procurers.

“Informal feedback on the draft standard is urgently needed
before it is submitted to the formal – and lengthy – standards-
making process”, said Dave Sawdon of TRE Projects, who is
working on the project for the European Telecommunications
Standards Institute (ETSI).

Sawdon said the commission hopes the finished standard will
“promote the procurement of accessible ICT products and
services by public bodies and hence promote the general
development and adoption of more accessible ICT.

“In support of this and to build a coherent EU-US market it is
hoped to maximise commonality between the emerging EU
standard and the ongoing refresh of Section 508 of the US
Rehabilitation Act.” Section 508 is a US law requiring public
bodies to ensure the ICT systems they buy are accessible.

The new draft will be published at:
http://www.mandate376.eu

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=753


+02: “Georgie” Apps Make Smartphones Smarter.

A new series of apps has been developed to enhance
accessibility features for Android-enabled smartphones for
blind and visually impaired users.

The “Georgie” apps allow blind and visually impaired users to
perform a number of functions additional to ‘standard’ phone
features, including recording and broadcasting audio blogs;
photographing text and having it read out to them, using an
optical character recognition feature; and audio tagging images
with sound clips. It will also read aloud screen text when users
touch the screen, and voice recognition software enables users
to speak the content for text messages into the phone.

Although all these features are already available from other
providers, Georgie collects them into one place for the first
time. It was designed by husband and wife founders of
assistive technology company Screenreader, Roger and
Margaret Wilson-Hinds, who are themselves blind, alongside
software architect Alan Kemp.

The fact the system was developed by blind users is key to its
power, Roger Wilson-Hinds told E-Access Bulletin. “We’re not
second guessing what blind users want. Georgie is not
retrofitted to software that’s been designed for sighted users.
Apple and Google both have accessibility settings that are a
great start, but the intricate and cluttered screens are very
difficult to navigate around and find the correct button, even if
it’s being read out.”

The software is available ready to use and pre-installed on a
Samsung Galaxy Y smartphone handset for £299, or can be
downloaded separately onto any existing Android-based phone
for £149.

Georgie’s core features help users send text messages; scroll
through phone book contacts; make phone calls; and configure
the phone. Three additional bundles of apps (at £24.99 each)
cover ‘travel’; ‘lifestyle’; and ‘communicate’.

These additional bundles feature apps that can, for example,
help users navigate around hazards on a daily route, by
allowing users to mark known dangers – such as potholes and
low-hanging branches – on a map, which then reminds the user
of the obstacle during their journey.

Georgie is being distributed through Sight and Sound
Technology: http://bit.ly/NwA1Lp

Earlier this year, the One Voice for Accessible ICT Coalition –
an umbrella group of organisations promoting access to
technology – published a report on apps that can help disabled
people, and access to apps and smartphones in general. See:
http://bit.ly/yBTdwo

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=751


+03: Dyslexia Spelling Checker Wins Techology4Good Award.

A piece of software that can correct spelling as the user types
into any programme – hugely valuable for people with dyslexia
– has won the accessibility award at the second annual
Technology4Good awards, presented in London this month.

“Global AutoCorrect” (
http://www.lexable.com/GlobalAutoCorrect )
is the brainchild of Neil Cottrell, a 24-year-old graduate who is
himself severely dyslexic.

Other finalists for the accessibility award were Panasonic
Corporation, for a range of “talking TVs” designed with the
RNIB (as discussed in recent issues of this newsletter – see:
http://bit.ly/HmjoAD ); Therapy Box, for a range of of apps
supporting people with communication disabilities; and satellite
TV company BSkyB, for embedding accessibility across its
products and services, including a talking electronic
programme guide.

Also shortlisted for an innovation award was MyChoicePad, a
Makaton language app for the iPad making Makaton signs and
symbols much easier and cheaper to use for children and
adults with special communication needs.

An AbilityNet Excellence in Accessibility Award went to the
celebrated physicist Professor Stephen Hawking, who has
motor neurone disease. Professor Hawking was not able to
attend the awards ceremony but recorded a message using his
electronic voice synthesiser, which he operates by twitching his
cheek.

He said: “I am delighted to accept this award as recognition for
all the truly great things that disabled people can achieve when
technology has given them the chance to shine.

“I was lucky to be born in the computer age. Without
computers my life would have been miserable, and my
scientific career impossible.

“...the Technology4Good awards remind us that technology is
a vital part of human existence. They show us that the right
tools, in the right hands, can help everyone, regardless of our
frailties, to achieve our true potential and advance as a
civilisation. And I hope that the Technology4Good awards will
inspire people to think about the needs of everyone around
them and make sure they can all benefit from the power of
computers and the internet to change their lives for the better.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=749


++News in Brief:

+04: IQ Guidance: A new online hub of resources to help
developers create accessible websites has been launched by
non-profit organisation Media Access Australia. The website,
Access iQ, features advice and guidance on creating accessible
content, accessibility news, event listings, and a ‘marketplace’
listing services, products and jobs within the sector.

Quick link: http://www.accessiq.org/


+05: Improving Interfaces: The barriers faced by disabled and
elderly people when using interfaces and control systems for
common technologies such as bank cash machines and
computer equipment are examined in a new report, ‘Accessible
user interfaces: priorities for research’. The report was written
by John Gill and Julio Abascal of the Cardiac project to
support and carry out research in accessible and assistive ICT.
Its recommendations include increased European support for
research in this field; and better dissemination of knowledge
about accessible interface designs that do not make it all the
way to a product stage.

Quick link: http://bit.ly/jtxaxc


+06: Pledging Change: Businesses are being asked to pledge
their commitment to a minimum standard of accessibility for
their company website and smartphone apps, by following five
key design criteria. The 180-Day WebSight Pledge campaign,
launched by the Royal National Institute of Blind People
(RNIB) and PC Pro magazine, will ask companies to adjust
their site or app over a period of six months to make it easier to
use for blind and visually impaired users. The five elements of
the pledge include: avoiding fixed-size fonts; making sites/apps
screen-reader compatible; using a constant interface; ensuring
keyboard-alone accessibility; and testing the site/app with blind
and visually impaired users. RNIB will offer advice and
consultancy to the companies throughout the campaign.

Quick link: http://bit.ly/OMwLXZ


+07: Job-Share Politics: John McDonnell MP, Labour
representative for Hayes and Harlington, has recorded a video
message asking for evidence from people with disabilities who
might like to become MPs if it were possible to job-share in
Parliament, Job-shares are not currently allowed for MPs,
something Mr McDonnell and others feel is one cause of
under-representation of disabled people and women in
Parliament. E-Access Bulletin readers are invited to respond:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/LuofRq

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: TV Trouble: Following our mention last issue of
accessible TV set top boxes manufactured by British firm
TVonics, our regular correspondent Brian Gaff, who is on the
committee of the Kingston upon Thames Association for the
Blind, writes in to say: “Are you aware that TVonics has been
in administration since 12 June? Though the RNIB say the box
is still available they won’t be drawn on whether it will
continue to be produced. I guess we must hope that the
software is generic enough to run on other makes of box in the
future with minimal conversion.”

In response Tara Alexander, Senior Manager – Innovation at
RNIB who had initially written in about TVonics,
acknowledged this “unfortunate situation”, and said: “I can
confirm that we still have stock of the DTR-HD500 set top box
and are still selling and supporting that box.”

She also forwarded a holding statement on TVonics going into
administration from Steve Tyler, Head of Innovation and
Development at RNIB, which said: “We learned today that
TVonics has gone into administration. The company has been a
great support in our bid to bring about a sea change in
accessibility in the area of TV and related products and
services.

“We are unable to comment further until we receive more
information from TVonics; however the set top box is still
available via the RNIB shop and our customers are able to call
our Helpline if they need support.”

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+09: Northern Voice: The same reader Brian Gaff has also
corrected a claim made in our last issue by the makers of the
“TechDis Jill”, who thought the voice was the first text-to-
speech tool to possess a Northern English accent.

Brian notes that the voice synthesiser software eSpeak, as used
by the free open source screenreader software NVDA, has had
a Northern English voice “for ages” alongside its main English
and American English voices, as well as a West Midlands voice
and an old-fashioned Received Pronunciation (RP) voice!

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+10: Airline Struggles: Further to our reporting last issue of a
legal settlement between the budget airline bmibaby and RNIB
over the inaccessibility of the airline’s website, regular reader
Gustaw Kon writes in to say the settlement was: “Doubtless a
kind of success but since bmibaby is in some kind of terminal
state (as it looks), not very useful.

“Much more useful would be if RNIB ensured that Ryanair
and Easyjet were more accessible. I used to find Easyjet easy
to access but they have changed their layout and their website
is unsatisfactorily accessible. Ryanair are a waste of time.

“And, while we are about it, what about the big boys... British
Airways are totally inaccessible. Like practically every airline,
they use the wonderful idea of presenting a map from which
you can find and book flights, together with splendid graphical
representations of timetables. Try hammering them into shape.”

[Comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+11: Opera Blocked: Reader Stephanie Leven has contacted E-
Access Bulletin to describe an experience she had recently in
attempting to receive a digital text copy of English translation
“supertitles” due to be displayed during a performance of
Puccini's Italian language opera la bohème she was due to
attend at Glyndebourne opera house in Sussex.

As she knew her sight is not good enough to follow these
surtitles live, Leven contacted Glyndebourne to ask for an
electronic copy to be emailed her so she could access it in
advance or convert it into a better format.

Glyndebourne Productions replied that it was unable to send
her the supertitle script as it is copyrighted material, but
suggested an alternative free English language libretto to the
opera which she could access online.

Leven says she does appreciate staff were trying to help, but
feels the copyright law must be changed as soon as possible to
allow access to this kind of material for disabled people.

She has since written to the Minister for Disabled People, Maria
Miller MP, to say: “Management should by now be able to
circumvent the ‘copyright’ excuse, when it is clear of the
purpose of the request.

“Although it is now too late for me for Glyndebourne I hope
we can find a way to move forward so that this does not
happen to the next visually impaired person. After all, a ticket
of £215 should include access to the words of the opera in a
suitable format.”

[Comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Special Report
- Paralympics Broadcasting

12: Winning The Accessible Games, Live and Online.

For Channel 4, being the official broadcaster of the 2012
Paralympic Games comes with a lot of prestige, but there are
also significant accessibility challenges. If the website and
other digital services of this event were not accessible to
disabled people, it would be absurd – not to mention
catastrophic from a PR perspective.

However, rising to these challenges have helped improve the
overall standard and awareness of digital accessibility within
the channel, says Paul Edwards, Channel 4’s online programme
manager for the Paralympics 2012.

“The fact that we’ve got the Paralympics means that the
importance of accessibility internally, within the company, has
been raised. So, people who previously didn’t have much
knowledge of the challenges of different accessibility needs
are now learning about it”, Edwards told E-Access Bulletin.

Edwards explained to the recent eAccess ’12 conference in
London ( http://www.headstar.com/eaccess12/ ) how the
Paralympics have provided a driver for a number of Channel
4’s separate divisions to come together to improve
accessibility.

Although Channel 4 did already have a corporate accessibility
programme including role-specific training, and a requirement
that all its projects be independently reviewed before going live
to ensure they meet accessibility requirements, one of the
initial challenges of the Paralympics project was considering
the different levels of accessibility experience within different
parts of the organisation, said Edwards.

“In TV, the whole issue of accessibility is often something
commissioners and producers don’t have to worry about,” he
said. “It’s something that’s done once a programme is made,
and they can then get it subtitled or add audio description.
That’s obviously not case with the web, where accessibility has
to be considered from day one.”

Additionally, for Channel 4’s online operations, a significant
number of external agencies are used for development work,
which presents a further challenge dealing with varying levels
of understanding about creating accessible content.

“In the past, we’ve discovered that there’s a big difference
between people saying ‘Yes, we understand accessibility’, and
having their knowledge properly questioned during a selection
process,” Edwards said. “Now, all prospective suppliers have
to provide their understanding of accessibility requirements as
part of the selection process.”

In broadcasting the Paralympics, Channel 4 will be providing
more than 400 hours of live sports coverage – more than ever
before in the channel’s history. As part of this task, Edwards
and his team have created a number of online platforms
specifically for Paralympic content.

Firstly, a Channel 4 Paralympics website has been designed (
http://bit.ly/lhBGdx )
featuring schedules, results and live video throughout the
Games. The site is supported by mobile apps on iOS and
Android systems, all of which have been reviewed by the
Digital Accessibility Centre, a non-profit accessibility
consultancy, alongside testing by disabled users.

A series of short video features have also been created,
including over 200 video diaries from Paralympic athletes and
individuals involved with the games, showing their build-up to
the event and “60-second guides” to Paralympic sports. Both
of these video series are available with closed captions and
subtitles.

Several accessible online game-simulations of Paralympic
sports have been developed for the site, including boccia, an
event which sees players in wheelchairs competing to throw
leather balls as close as possible to a ‘jack’ ball on a court, and
wheelchair rugby.

Finally, the online video player used to broadcast live sporting
events has presented a major challenge for text access. “Live
video for sport is a real challenge when it comes to
commentary and subtitles, and the accuracy of live captions in
this area has been derided for some time”, said Edwards. “The
speed at which live sport moves often means it’s unfeasible to
produce accurate captions. People have suggested putting a
delay in the broadcast, but this is often not acceptable to many
viewers, particularly if there’s an equivalent radio broadcast
going on at same time.”

To tackle the problem, Edwards and his team have created an
online video platform to support text commentary on the right-
hand side of the screen. “This won’t necessarily be as
comprehensive as full subtitles, but we’re trying to provide a
context for what’s happening within the games, while at the
same time trying to provide a really good viewer experience”,
said Edwards. “I’ll hold my hands up and say that it’s an
experiment, but I think it works better than live subtitles for a
very fast sport like wheelchair rugby. The challenge is to
balance reporting of every piece of action in a sport with the
pace of the narrative. We’ve done a lot of tests on that, and
we’re getting pretty close.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=746

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility
discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our
sixth birthday next month, you’ll find discussion of
accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2012 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 150 ends.]
