[Editor’s Note – The issue sent out earlier had the
incorrect ‘Inbox’ section – here is the correct version with
the new ‘Inbox’ section. Apologies!]


++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 149, June 2012.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 149 Contents.

01: Launch for National Accessibility Awareness Campaign
- All organisations urged to embed videos and spread the word.

02: New Resources Promote Inclusive e-Learning
- Text-to-Speech Tools and Guidance Free To Use.

03: Appeal Court Upholds Canadian Woman’s Web Access
Case
- Government loses challenge to 2010 ruling.

News in Brief: 04: Case Resolved - low-cost airline settles over
website; 05: Prize Apps - smartphone innovation awards; 06:
Parliamentary Briefing - Westminster event; 07: Inaccessibility
Blacklist - Italian sites named and shamed.

Section Two: The Inbox. 08: TV News - cost of talking sets;
09: Education Law - schools access query; 10: Political
Problems - access to Parliamentary correspondence.

Section Three: Conference report: eAccess ’12.
11: Time To Be Creative: Following accessibility guidelines is
not enough – organisations must instil an inclusive approach
throughout everything they do, delegates heard at this year’s
eAccess event. Tristan Parker reports.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Launch for National Accessibility Awareness Campaign.

Go ON Gold, a new national campaign to raise awareness
about the barriers faced by disabled people in accessing
modern technologies, from the internet to smartphones and
digital TV, was launched this week by a consortium of partners
lead by Headstar, the publisher of E-Access Bulletin.

Running for a year from summer 2012 to summer 2013, Go
ON Gold is being launched ahead of the London Paralympics
to capitalise on a stronger- than-usual public focus on disability
issues.

At the project’s core is a partnership between the UK’s major
e-accessibility players including the new national digital
inclusion charity Go ON UK led by Martha Lane Fox, the UK
government’s Digital Champion. Other partners include
Headstar; AbilityNet, the UK’s leading charity on access to IT;
BCS; the UK’s national blindness charity RNIB; Disability
Rights UK (formerly RADAR), an umbrella group of other
major charities; and the Equality and Human Rights
Commission. The project is funded by Nominet Trust.

A series of video interviews with leading figures in the
disability community – including Paralympic athletes – are
being created for the campaign, about how access to new
technologies has transformed their lives. All organisations and
individuals invited to embed the videos in their own site. The
Go ON Gold website also intends to act as a signpost to all the
best accessibility resources elsewhere on the web.

Any organisation can sign up to become a Go ON Gold
partner. For more information, see:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=734 .


+02: New Resources Promote Inclusive e-Learning.

Two free new learning resources have been released by JISC
TechDis, a education advisory service on accessible and
inclusive technology, to boost skills for learners with and
without disabilities.

The first resource will help learners who use text-to-speech
applications: two new voices for text-to-speech were
commissioned from specialists CereProc available for free to
learners and learning institutes.

The male and female voices – named “TechDis Jack” and
“TechDis Jill” – are designed to be easy to understand,
“youthful and modern”. TechDis Jill possesses a Northern
English accent, which its creators believe is a first in text-to-
speech.

According to the TechDis website, “all staff and learners over
16 in every publicly-funded learning provider in England
should be eligible for the TechDis Voices”, which can be
downloaded after registering: http://bit.ly/LfKoz3 .

The second project to be launched was the JISC TechDis
Toolbox ( http://www.jisctechdis.ac.uk/tbx/ ), with information
to help people use ICT and online technologies more
effectively in employment.

This information is divided into five main categories: ‘using
technology’, ‘planning and organisation’, ‘communicating’,
‘teamworking’, and ‘different needs?’ It includes guidance on
how to carry out effective Google searches; and how to operate
text-to-speech on some mobile devices.

The resources were launched at ND’12, the seventh national
digital inclusion conference, held in London last month. In a
launch video, Alistair McNaught of JISC TechDis said: “We
spent eight years working with learning providers from the top
down, helping to influence senior management teams,
librarians, learning support staff, tutors, etc, and telling them
about the kinds of tools and technology that could make a
difference to their learners.

“But while that was fantastic in some areas, in many places it
just wasn’t trickling down to the learner, so we decided to flip
it over and work form the learner upwards. The whole point of
the Toolbox is to take all the things you wish your tutor might
have told you about but never did, and take that to learners
directly.”

The work was funded by the Department for Business,
Innovation and Skills.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=736 .


+03: Appeal Court Upholds Canadian Woman’s Web Access
Case.

A blind accessibility consultant who took the Canadian Federal
Government to court over the inaccessibility of its websites has
won a second victory, after the Canadian Federal Court of
Appeal upheld an initial decision in her favour.

Canadian citizen Donna Jodhan, who is blind, won her first
case against the government in 2010, after claiming that her
rights were breached when she could not apply for a
government job online or complete an online census form
using screen-reader technology. The government then appealed
the decision (see E-Access Bulletin issue 133:
http://bit.ly/hNcwT4 ), continuing a long legal battle.

In its defence, the Canadian Government had claimed the case
should be thrown out since the information was available to
Jodhan by other means – by telephone, post or in person.
However, the appeal court has now upheld Jodhan’s 2010
victory, which included a ruling that the Canadian Government
must make its websites accessible for blind and visually
impaired citizens within 15 months.

Jodhan told E-Access Bulletin she was “absolutely delighted,
humbled, and relieved that this decision has been handed
down.” She said: “It is my sincere hope that the Canadian
government will now take the initiative to work with our
community to ensure that the court’s ruling is adhered to in full
and in the spirit that it was meant to be. Now we need to build
on this and use this as a launching pad for creating more
awareness and to encourage all stake holders to work together
for a common goal.”

In a press statement about the ruling, a spokesperson for the
Federal Government said: “Our government is continuing to
implement the Federal Court decision from 2010. We are
committed to web accessibility and to date over 100
government institutions are converting their content in line with
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=738 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Case Resolved: A legal dispute between the Royal
National Institute of Blind People (RNIB) and bmibaby over
the alleged inaccessibility of the low-cost airline’s website to
visually impaired customers has been settled. The legal action
was taken by RNIB earlier this year, after the organisation had
audited bmibaby’s websites following complaints from blind
and visually impaired customers and made recommendations
which were not acted on. In a statement approved by both
parties, bmibaby apologised to its blind and visually impaired
customers and said it is committed to rectifying remaining
accessibility issues on its website:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/KDlcl5


+05: Prize Apps: The second annual Smart Accessibility
Awards have been launched to find the best smartphone
applications catering for the elderly and those with disabilities.
The awards, supported by the AGE Platform Europe network
and the European Disability Forum, were launched by the
Vodafone Foundation, which supports mobile technology
projects to drive social change. Apps will be rewarded in four
categories: social participation; independent living; mobility;
and wellbeing, with entries invited by 15 October:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/KVMO3Z


+06: Parliamentary Briefing: A briefing for UK
Parliamentarians on the barriers disabled people face in
accessing and using ICT, and what can be done to remove
some of these barriers, has been published by the
Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology. To support
the document a seminar, ‘ICT for Disabled People’, will take
place in the Houses of Parliament on 5 July, featuring field
experts talking about the transforming potential of technology,
and how ICT can be made more accessible. All are welcome:

Quick link to event information: http://bit.ly/NUhuab

Quick link to the document: http://bit.ly/MtAwDA


+07: Inaccessibility Blacklist: A new Italian web portal is
naming and shaming websites and applications throughout the
country that are inaccessible to blind and visually impaired
computer users. The project, called ‘Titengodocchio’ in Italian
(translated as “I am keeping an eye on you”) has been created
by a 17-year-old blind technical student, Vincenzo Rubano,
who collects reports from users, verifies them and enters
upheld claims onto a ‘blacklist’ of inaccessible websites. Sites
featured so far include the Italian National Institute for
Statistics; the iPad version of Google Analytics; and the iPhone
version of Skype:


Quick link (note the site is in Italian): http://bit.ly/wOLUmo

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: TV News: Our recent discussion of talking TV sets from
Panasonic has raised further response. Debbie Payne, customer
services officer at Herefordshire Council, says: “I'm very
encouraged by Panasonic's move to introduce the new talking
TVs. However, I think their longevity will depend on supply
and demand.

“I have a Pure DAB radio and I was disappointed to learn that
it's no longer available. Unfortunately, it's a sad fact of life that
these accessible products are usually costly and, despite
extensive publicity by the RNIB, the majority of blind and
visually impaired consumers are on low incomes and unable to
afford them.”

Further to the issue of affordability Tara Alexander, Senior
Manager – Innovation at RNIB, writes in to promote an
alternative product created by TVonics, a British manufacturer
of set top boxes with Ivona, a text-to-speech developer. The
two have collaborated with RNIB to launch a fully accessible
Freeview+ digital TV HD recorder usable by blind and partially
sighted people which retails for £179.95 including VAT.

“This product might be the answer to some of your readers'
concerns about the cost of replacing their television with one
of the Panasonic range of talking televisions”, Alexander
writes.
The device can be found by searching for “TVonics” at:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/shop/

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+09: Education Law: Emma Moore of the Child Development
Centre at Bedford Borough Council writes in to ask if anyone
can help her determine what the legal position is on ensuring
accessibility of schools ICT systems.

“I’ve been asked by my manager to write to schools about the
importance of accessibility of websites and school intranets,
and wondered if there was a legal obligation for schools to
provide this?”

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+10: Political Problems: Wendy Sharpe, a reader from
Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire, writes in to relate a problem
she encountered in receiving information from her MP, David
Lidington, when she wrote to him with an enquiry about the
government’s recent draft Communications Data Bill.

“I recently received an email from my MP with two
attachments which are “.png” files [an image rather than a text
format]”, writes Sharpe. “These files are apparently two pages
of a letter which he sent me in response to my query, but of
course, they are totally inaccessible to a blind user. I think you
should know that Parliament is not providing documents which
everyone can access, thus breaching the Equality Act 2010.”

After raising the issue with David Lidington’s office, however,
she received a response which clarified that the MP had simply
been forwarding a hard copy of a letter he had obtained from
the minister overseeing the draft Bill, James Brokenshire.

The note from Victoria Blane, a caseworker for Mr Lidington,
read: “I am sorry that you were not able to decipher the letter
that I forwarded to you from James Brokenshire MP regarding
the government's communication data proposals.

“A number of constituents contacted Mr Lidington about this
issue, and he subsequently wrote to the relevant Minister to
pass on their concerns. He received a hard copy response in
the post and, as is usual practice, constituents were forwarded a
scanned version for their reference... I contacted the Home
Office to request a text only version of the letter which I have
now received. I have attached a copy and hope it will be of use
to you.”

This response was satisfactory so far as the MP is concerned,
said Sharpe: “It clearly isn't my MP's fault that scanned
documents are distributed in this way.”

Ironically, when Sharpe tried to access the draft Bill itself, she
was directed to a .pdf file which, when she attempted to open
it, simply read: "empty file". The link was:
http://www.official-
documents.gov.uk/document/cm83/8359/8359.pdf

"This is clearly a paper which has been scanned in as images,
again inaccessible to a blind person," she said.

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Conference report
eAccess ’12.

+10: Time To Be Creative
by Tristan Parker.

A more creative, inclusive approach to accessibility is needed
than simply following technical guidelines, delegates heard at
the eAccess 12 conference co-hosted this week by E-Access
Bulletin publisher Headstar.

David Sloan of the Digital Media Access Group at Dundee
University said his university’s School of Computing had
integrated user feedback into all aspects of its work, from the
building’s open design to recruitment of local elderly people to
come in and participate in research.

“Involving people who benefit from the skills you’re teaching
is critical, rather than just presenting people with guidelines like
WCAG and using that in an assessment”, Sloan said.

Paul Edwards, programme manager for Channel 4’s online
coverage of the upcoming Paralympic Games, agreed that
sticking too rigidly to accessibility guidelines can have a
detrimental effect on your audience. Flexibility is crucial: “The
most important thing we’ve been trying to do is make sure our
process is flexible enough to react when a situation occurs.
When you’re looking at guidelines like WCAG, sticking too
closely to them actually blinkers you to what’s happening to
your users.”

Henny Swan, senior accessibility specialist for iPlayer and
mobile at BBC Technology, said modern developers should
ensure a website responds to the device it is being viewed on,
including smartphones and mobile devices: “responsive
design”.

However, designing accessible content for mobile devices is
still tough due to a lack of authoritative guidelines on the
subject, Swan said. This led to Swan and her team at the BBC
developing their own specialist guidelines for accessible BBC
mobile content: “We decided to write guidelines for HTML,
Android and iOS (the iPhone operating system), because those
are our three biggest areas. We needed ‘device-agnostic’
guidelines, rather than writing three different sets.”

The result is ‘Mobile and tablet accessibility guidelines and
techniques’ – an internal BBC guide for developers, designers
and project managers when creating mobile content. Guidance
includes ‘supporting device capabilities’, which states that
content must try not to break specific device accessibility. An
example of this is the ‘pinch’ zoom function on the iOS, said
Swan, which allows users to magnify content with a small
finger gesture on the screen. “If you’re coding in HTML you
can suppress ability for user to do that, immediately preventing
a lot of people being able to read content quickly and easily.
Don’t suppress what the device allows you to do.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=741 .

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility
discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our
sixth birthday next month, you’ll find discussion of
accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2012 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 149 ends.]
