++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 148, May 2012.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 148 Contents.

01: Launch For New National Disability IT Network
- Users trained to access online government services and more.

02: Price Comparison Sites Excluding Millions, Report Finds
- Leading websites throw up major access barriers.

03: Campaigners Urge Further Changes to Copyright Law
- Wider copying permissions needed for disabled access.

News In Brief: 04: June Event: - e-Access 12 places still
available; 05: Travel Training – e-learning programme for rail
employees; 06: Turning Tables – e-book on accessible PDF
features.

Section Two: Inbox.
07: Commission Responds – equalities body improves
newsletter; 08: Television Continuation – more on text-to-
speech TVs.

Section Three: Focus - Web Accessibility.
09: Putting People and Processes First
Although the international “WCAG” guidelines on web
accessibility are widely used, they can be a potential source of
limitation, says Brian Kelly. Here, he explores broader web
accessibility mechanisms and approaches, including the BS
8878 Code of Practice.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Launch For New National Disability IT Network.

A new network of 51 specialist organisations across England
have been funded to help local computer users with a disability
or learning difficulty to get online and use government
services.

The Disability Network initiative has been launched by the
national technology access body UK Online Centres (
http://www.ukonlinecentres.com/ ), with specialist learning
providers across England receiving funding of £7,500 each to
provide training and support to disabled computer users.

Sarah Stabler, network manager at UK Online Centres, told E-
Access Bulletin that the learning centres will introduce learners
to basic ICT equipment and online resources, and show them
what online government services are available which could be
of use to them. “For example, a disabled person could register
for a blue disability badge online, find out about benefits and
support available to them, or use the part of the NHS Choices
website with information for people with long-term health
problems”, Stabler said.

Some learning providers have used the grant, which runs from
1 April 2012-31 March 2013, to invest in new equipment, such
as iPad tablet computers, which allows the organisations to take
the technology out to disabled learners, sometimes in their own
homes. “The idea is for learners to use the iPad to give them an
initial hook on the internet, and then progress on from there.
Individuals may choose to then come into a learning centre and
take up training on a more formal basis”, said Stabler.

As well as basic ICT skills such as using a mouse and sending
emails, some learning centres offer programmes on areas such
as using Facebook, studying family history, and digital
photography.

“Once we’ve got people online, we can find what the personal
hook might be to keep them online. It could be about
communication, like using Skype to keep in touch with friends
and family”, said Stabler. “What we’re hoping is that the
Disability Network makes the end user a little more
independent, and opens up access to a range of resources to
things that might not otherwise have.”

The learning providers that make up the Disability Network
include a range of community and training centres and
grassroots organisations, and are all specialists in their field,
including several organisations from mental health charity
Mind, and centres that focus on assisting deaf learners and
learners with mobility issues.

As part of their bid to UK Online Centres, each provider was
required to demonstrate their specialist skills and estimate the
number of learners they hoped to engage with during the
funding period, and how many of those would complete an
online basic skills programme, and how many of these learners
would progress to using online government services.

UK Online Centres is in the process of looking for new
specialist learning providers for the network, as there are still
funds available. Interested organisations can email
help@ukonlinecentres.com for more information.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=730


+02: Price Comparison Sites Excluding Millions, Report Finds.

Four out of five leading price comparison websites surveyed
are inaccessible to disabled and elderly users, potentially
putting them in breach of the Equality Act 2010, a new report
has found.

Conducted by ICT access charity AbilityNet, the research
presents a dismal picture of accessibility by disabled and
elderly users for the websites, which allow people to compare
prices of goods and services including online shopping and
insurance prices.

A wide range of accessibility issues and barriers were found,
including images without alternative text, rendering these
images inaccessible to screen-readers; keyboard traps;
inconsistent navigation of pages; colour contrasts which may
be difficult for visually impaired users; and fixed text sizes.

Fixing these basic issues would be a relatively simple process,
and “would benefit millions of potential customers”, Robin
Christopherson, Head of Digital Inclusion at AbilityNet, told E-
Access Bulletin.

Four out of the five comparison websites surveyed
(comparethemarket.com, gocompare.com
mysupermarket.co.uk and confused.com) scored just one star
out of five, and failed to achieve the minimum standard for
estimated legal compliance, as set out by AbilityNet’s rating
system – based partially on checkpoints set out in the widely-
used international Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
(WCAG).

The fifth site, kelkoo.co.uk, scored two stars out of a possible
five, achieving some of the legal requirements set out in the
testing.

The sites were audited by AbilityNet using a mix of manual
checks, an independent accessibility testing tool (the
HiSoftware Compliance Sheriff: http://bit.ly/ITVZqz ), and
testing by disabled computer users.

Unfortunately, price comparison websites are far from unique
in their lack of accessibility, Christopherson said: “In our
estimation, around 90%-95% of websites out there don’t meet
a base level of accessibility and don’t comply with legal and
moral requirements. There is also a very significant business
case to making websites inclusive.”

The report is the latest in AbilityNet’s bi-monthly ‘State of the
eNation’ reports, each examining the accessibility of websites
in a particular sector. It is available as a Word document:
http://bit.ly/IPTGE1
or as a PDF:
http://bit.ly/IIgO3u .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=726


+03: Campaigners Urge Further Changes to Copyright Law.

The British Assistive Technology Association (BATA) and
RNIB are calling for changes to the copyright law to allow
disabled people to copy all legally owned digital books or
multimedia into more accessible formats.

The calls come as part of the organisation’s response to
consultation on proposed changes to copyright law from the
UK Intellectual Property Office in a report by Professor Ian
Hargreaves – chair of digital economy at the Cardiff School of
Journalism, Media and Cultural Studies – which would allow
wider and easier access to a range of materials for disabled
people.

The independent report, entitled ‘Digital Opportunity: A review
of Intellectual Property and Growth’ (available here as a PDF:
http://bit.ly/e7jPxQ ), proposes changes which would ease
restrictions on individuals copying material that they own, such
as music, films and documents that an individual has
purchased, allowing copying to more accessible formats for
personal use. For example, a PDF file could be converted to an
audio file, or a document could be scanned in order to increase
the font size.

However, BATA – which campaigns for the rights of AT users
– is calling for stronger freedoms allowing individuals to copy
any material that they have legal access to, and not just material
that they own. This would include library books and
information on public websites.

In its own consultation response, the RNIB said it too supports
a copyright exception to allow all private copying, and
“breaking” of digital rights management (DRM) systems that
prevent this.

Overall however, the charity – like BATA – welcomed the
proposed changes. “These changes alone will not end the book
famine, or problems with access to magazines, news and
multimedia materials”, the RNIB said. “However, they will
contribute towards that goal, and with just 7% of published
works being accessible at present, all reasonable measures that
can alleviate the book famine should be taken.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=723


++News in Brief:

+04: June Event: Places are still available for e-Access 12, the
UK’s leading annual event on access to technology by disabled
people. The event is aimed at public bodies, businesses and
organisations of all sizes, charities and community groups who
want to make their digital services more accessible and
inclusive – for business, ethical and legal reasons. The event
takes place on 28 June at the government conference centre in
Westminster, central London:

Quick link: http://www.headstar.com/eaccess12/


+05: Travel Training: An e-learning programme to help more
than 600 Network Rail employees who have volunteered to
become ‘Travel Champions’ during the London 2012 Olympic
and Paralympic Games has been developed by disability
equality training organisation Wideaware. The online
programme will feature information on how the Travel
Champions can help disabled spectators at train stations
throughout the games, including those with mobility, learning
and sensory impairments:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/IPxk2s


+06: Turning Tables: A new e-book explaining how to design
and build accessible PDF tables is now out, written by Ted
Page, director of web editorial services company PWS. The
book – available in the free e-book format EPUB and for the
Kindle e-reader – gives authors, designers, web editors and
document producers advice on creating accessible PDF data
tables and retrospectively revising currently inaccessible tables:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/IFzshq

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: Commission Responds: Clive Lever, Diversity and
Equality Officer at Kent County Council, wrote in to bemoan
the apparent inaccessibility of aspects of an email newsletter
from an organisation that should be setting the standard:
“Please can you advise on the best way that we may be able to
persuade the Equality and Human Rights Commission (of all
people) to send out newsletters that conform to accessibility
standards? For instance, three links in a row that say "read
more" doesn't seem the best example to be setting.”

After receiving the query from E-Access Bulletin, Jean Irvine
OBE, Equality and Human Rights Commissioner, raised the
matter internally and writes back to inform us of progress.

She writes: “I have checked this with the web site manager who
has asked me to thank you for bringing this to our attention
[and we are] working to resolve this. We now provide an
alternative plain text version, as the e-newsletter is sent out as a
MIME message, in otherwords it contains a message sent in
both plain text and HTML. Recipients receive one version or
the other depending on how their mailbox is set up.

“We also publish the newsletter on our website in an accessible
format:
http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/publications/email-
newsletter/previous-editions/
Short link: http://bit.ly/KdvVEw .

“We are now looking at the links themselves, replacing the
‘read more’ description with more relevant and accurate link
text descriptions.”

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+08: Television Continuation: Phil Smalley, a reader from
Leicestershire who is blind, writes in to add to last issue’s
comments from reader Nigel Timbrell on a move by Panasonic
to build text-to-speech functionality into 30 of its TV models.
Nigel had welcomed this move, but said: “My concern would
be how many people who need this facility are going to go out
and purchase a brand-new TV set?”

Phil replies: “While I appreciate Nigel’s comments about
existing users not having the resources to go out and purchase
£430+ TV sets in order to benefit from the new technology,
unfortunately, this is the way of technical advances – wouldn’t
it be good to have “start-stop” technology fitted to your old
banger rather than going out and purchasing a new model!

“No, the exciting thing about the Panasonic development is that
it’s mainstream. This means those who need to purchase a new
TV and require text to speech technology can go to the high
street for a demonstration or purchase the best price online.
Additionally, more exciting than a mere set-top box, the
Panasonic range can enable sight-impaired people to record
and retrieve programmes.

“Ideally, other manufacturers will follow suit and then when
you, as a sight-impaired person, want to purchase a TV with
text to speech, there will be far greater choice in facilities,
quality and price.”

Phil concludes: “So thank you, Panasonic, for taking the lead.
Sadly I won’t be rushing out and purchasing at the moment as
I’ve just given up on my speech-enabled Freeview box as
stuttering speech, automatic turning off of audio description
and freezing/locking up have finally got the better of me, and I
have switched to Freesat.”

Our regular correspondent Brian Gaff, who is on the committee
of the Kingston upon Thames Association for the Blind, writes
in to add his perspective to the debate on talking TVs – and
talking home appliances in general.

“About talking domestic appliances: the history of these is not
a good one. I recall in the late 1970s or early 1980s, Sharp had
a talking video. Nobody seemed to buy it so they stopped
making it. Admittedly, the voice was rather robotic. And what
happened to the talking DAB radio by Pure?

“I'd like to see the same technology as on the Panasonics used
on stereo systems and so on. But in a few years’ time, will
anyone still be making voice-assisted units?”

Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com .

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Focus
Web Accessibility.

09: Putting People and Processes First
By Brian Kelly.

For many web authors, developers and policy makers, the issue
of accessibility to disabled people is addressed mainly by
trying to ensure that their sites conform with the international
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) maintained by
the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) of the World Wide Web
Consortium.

For example, the UK Government’s ‘Delivering inclusive
websites guidelines’ ( http://bit.ly/3lCReg ), published in 2009,
said: “The minimum standard of accessibility for all public
sector websites is Level Double-A of the W3C Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines. All new websites must conform to
these guidelines from the point of publication.”

However, as recently described in a blog post I have written
(entitled ‘Aversive Disablism, Web Accessibility and the Web
Developer’: http://bit.ly/ISdAhh ) which details the seventh
annual Blogging Against Disablism Day, there is a need to ask:
“Are web developers and web authors who have embraced
WCAG guidelines unknowingly creating barriers for people
with disabilities?” This question could also be asked of
government policy makers. There is a need for an alternative
approach which caters for the limitations of policy based solely
on WCAG conformance.

The web’s inventor Tim Berners-Lee has said that “The power
of the web is in its universality. Access by everyone regardless
of disability is an essential aspect.” However, although this is a
laudable goal, implementation of WCAG guidelines is not
necessarily a way of achieving it. For example, WCAG 2.0
guidelines which state that “content must be understandable”
would mean that the famous UK newspaper football headline
from 2003 – “Super Cally Go Ballistic, Celtic Are Atrocious” –
would not be allowed, since this wordplay will only be
appreciated by those who are familiar with the song from the
film ‘Mary Poppins’, and the football teams in question. In a
more general context, while we can understand that people
with Asperger’s syndrome may have difficulties interpreting
common phrases such as “it’s raining cats and dogs”, it is
unlikely that organisations will ban such usage in order to
ensure that the content is “accessible by everyone regardless of
disability”.

A more comprehensive critique of the limitations of the
WCAG guidelines and the WAI model for addressing web
accessibility issues is given in my papers on ‘Forcing
standardization or accommodating diversity? A framework for
applying the WCAG in the real world’ ( http://bit.ly/9BHyiH )
and ‘Accessibility 2.0: people, policies and processes’ (
http://bit.ly/LohYBA ).

We can agree that the WAI approach, developed in the late
1990s, has been valuable in raising awareness of ways in
which web resources can enhance experiences for people with
disabilities. But rather than regarding WCAG conformance as
definitive solution, we should regard it as a useful set of
guidelines, whose use and relevance needs to be considered in
light of a variety of factors including the needs of the target
audience and the resources available for the development of
the service.

In addition, there will be the need to consider risks in failing to
provide a service, even if it does not conform with WCAG
guidelines. For example, should resources for an ‘amplified
event’, in which the talks are made available by a live video
stream and afterwards for downloading, be deleted if resources
for captioning the videos are not available? Common sense
would seem to suggest that deleting resources, particularly
videos of talks which might be particularly valuable to some
people, is not a great way of enhancing accessibility!

The BS 8878 Web Accessibility Code of Practise, which is
summarised by Jonathan Hassell, the BS 8878 editor, on his
Hassell Inclusion blog ( http://bit.ly/ugpXgp ) provides an
agreed mechanism which allows guidelines such as WCAG to
be used when they are fit for purpose.

The value of this approach is that it understands the importance
of the context of usage.

In the past, criticisms of WAI’s limitations were met by the
response of “WAI may be flawed, but there is no alternative”.
We are now in a position whereby there is an alternative
approach, which has been developed not as a competitor to
WCAG, but as an overarching framework which enables the
balanced application of guidelines such as WCAG.

The development of web services and web applications is a
process. Accessibility considerations therefore need to be built
into the everyday practices across the full web development
life-cycle, from conception and specification through
development to delivery and maintenance. BS 8878 has been
developed to document the key stages in the life-cycle.

Section 6 is the core of the standard. It makes
recommendations for accessibility being addressed across a 16-
step model of the web product development and maintenance
process (described below). These steps span initial conception
and requirements analysis such as defining the target audiences
for the web product, and defining the user goals and tasks it
needs to provide. (steps 1 to 6); strategic choices based on that
research (steps 7 to 11); the decision to procure or develop the
web product either in-house or contracted out (step 11);
production of the web product (steps 12 and 13); evaluation
(step14); the launch, where it will be important to communicate
the web product’s accessibility decisions (step 15); and post-
launch maintenance (step 16).

Overall, users’ experiences are pre-eminent in assessing the
accessibility of any web resource. This follows from the
understanding of accessibility as a property of the relationship
between the users and the resource, and that context is
important. In seeking to ensure good experiences for disabled
people in interacting with web resources, it is essential to
consider their needs throughout the development cycle, and the
value of systems that collect and respond to user-provided
feedback on accessibility, in their own terms.

NOTE: Article edited from a paper by Brian Kelly (University
of Bath), Martyn Cooper (Open University), David Sloan
(Dundee University), and Sarah Lewthwaite (King’s College
London) in a series exploring best practices for enhancing
accessibility of online services ( http://bit.ly/Laov ). Kelly is
also co-author of ‘A Challenge to Web Accessibility Metrics
and Guidelines: Putting People and Processes First’ (
http://bit.ly/KgyDZz ), presented at accessibility workshop
W4A 2012.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=719

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility
discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our
sixth birthday next month, you’ll find discussion of
accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2012 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 148 ends.]
