++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 153, November-December 2012.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
In Association With Go ON Gold:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others
So they can subscribe directly, at no cost.
(sign-up details at the end).



++Issue 153 Contents.

01: Accessible Design Event Fuels User-Focused Innovation
- Event aims to change mindset of “retrofitting” products.

02: Call For New Task-Based Approach To Digital Inclusion
- “Change in mind set” needed by organisations, says report.

03: Personalisation Is Key To Draft E-Learning Standard
- Comments invited by educational bodies and tech companies.

News in Brief: 04: Shock Stats - One third of disabled adults
have never used internet; 05: Nudge Online - report tackles
elderly exclusion; 06: Directive Proposed - European web rules
drafted.

Section Two: Inbox.
07: Career Opportunity? Video captioning – stenographer
suggestion.

Section Three: Profile Feature: Ro O’Shay
08: The World at My Fingertips: When Ro O’Shay lost her sight
in 2008, her MacBook and iPhone quickly became invaluable
to her, and she is now a prolific blogger, Tweeter and online
advocate. She talks to Tristan Parker about her passion for
technology.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Accessible Design Event Fuels User-Focused Innovation.

Sensors to help people secure their home and an accessible
kettle were the winning entries in a recent event that
encouraged participants to design and build products that are
usable by everyone.

Created by accessible design social business and community
Enabled by Design ( http://enabledbydesign.org/
), the “Enabled by Design-athon” featured 13 teams designing
and modifying innovative items.

“If you have design-for-all as your starting point, it was about
asking how we can modify things and customise things – how
can we take advantage of new technology, materials and new
ways of working to make things more accessible to people?”
Denise Stephens, Founder of Enabled by Design, told E-Access
Bulletin.

Running over two days, the event began with sessions to help
participants understand some of the challenges faced by people
living with particular impairments, and how they might account
for these challenges when designing a product.

Given access to a range of materials and equipment, including
3D printers, the teams then set about designing their own
products. Two winners were picked. The first was
‘SafeHouse’, a project which tells homeowners if all their
windows and doors are closed using sensors to complete
circuits. “Rather than having to go round your whole house and
check that everything is secure and closed, you could have a
central panel, which can tell you if there’s a window or door
open”, said Stephens. “Although SafeHouse could be used by
anyone as a security feature, it may be particularly useful for
older people or those with memory difficulties”, she said.

The second winner was ‘Paul’s Kettle’, a device designed for
an attendee at the event who was born without lower limbs. A
team designed a lightweight kettle with a jug shape, modified
handle and pivot, allowing someone with limited mobility to
easily pick up and pour the kettle.

The design consultancy and event partner IDEO, will now run
a session to help the winning groups develop their ideas and
examine possible methods of acquiring funding for their
designs. Other partners included: the government’s Technology
Strategy Board; Ravensbourne, a digital media and design
higher education institution and the location of the event; the
public service consultancy FutureGov; and sugru – a self-
setting rubber which can be moulded and added to items to fix,
modify and make them easier to use.

Stephens said that the event had proved particularly useful for
designers, who found it useful to speak directly to people
about potential ideas and developing their products. “A
message [from the Design-athon] would be to really involve
people from the beginning of the design process. Rather than
retrofitting something for somebody, why not speak to people
throughout and use that information to help inspire and
influence your design?”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=792


+02: Call For New Task-Based Approach To Digital Inclusion.

A “change in mind set” on digital inclusion is needed by
organisations in all sectors after a general failure to create
accessible digital systems – particularly for those with a
disability or the elderly – a new report by technology access
charity AbilityNet says.

“Mind the Digital Gap: It’s bigger than you think” says that
although there has been much discussion on accessibility and
inclusive digital systems over the past 15 years, this has not
yielded significant results. “The reality is … that apart from a
small number of good examples, many digital systems and
content are inaccessible to the majority of disabled and older
people. The current methodology … has failed and we need a
change in mind set on how we approach digital inclusion,” it
says.

The paper proposes a six-part strategy to help organisations
develop a more inclusive digital environment and economy.
This includes the creation of a “support service” to help
disabled and older people use technology effectively; and
encouraging business, government and the third sector to work
toward digital inclusion together through a new forum.

The paper also stresses the importance of task-based testing –
examining the achievability of individual tasks – in designing
inclusive digital services. As an example of how not to do this,
the report uses the example of an airline website where a user
is sent back to the beginning of the ticket-buying process if the
required information is not completed in a certain time. This
security feature may make it difficult for someone with a
learning or cognitive impairment to complete the process, and
an adjustment to the cut-off time would increase usability for
these groups, it says.

“We have to recognise that people use technology to complete
a task, whether that is filling in an online form, buying
something, looking for information and so on,” Nigel Lewis,
chief executive of AbilityNet, told E-Access Bulletin. “The
approach to inclusion and accessibility has [so far] focused on
piecemeal elements such as alternative text for images rather
than thinking of what the user is actually trying to achieve”, he
said.

The new report builds on suggestions made by Kevin Carey,
chairman of the Royal National Institute of Blind People, in a
separate discussion paper commissioned by AbilityNet on
improved consumer access to digital information, “Universal
citizen and customer access”. Both papers can be downloaded
at:
http://bit.ly/R2ZqQM

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=790


+03: Personalisation Is Key To Draft E-Learning Standard.

Public comment is being invited on a newly updated
accessibility standard for students and learners, which focuses
on personalising digital learning resources as a method of
maximising accessibility for each learner.

The standard, Access for All version 3.0 (AfA v3.0), is
produced by IMS Global Learning Consortium, a non-profit
body whose members include more than 180 leading
universities, educational organisations and technology
companies worldwide. It aims to give a personalised
experience for learners through use of a “common language”
which describes a learner’s needs and preferences.

This information is not based around specifics of a learner’s
medical condition or history, but how the learner interacts with
digital resources, such as computers. Any specific needs of a
user – if someone can only operate a computer using a
keyboard, for example – are recorded, so resources can be
adapted accordingly.

Although AfA v3.0 states that “no single resource has to be
100% accessible to all learners”, flexibility and the potential to
alter a resource are important to the standard, as they increase
the chances for personalisation.

The constituent sections of AfA v3.0 can be viewed on the
IMS Global website: http://www.imsglobal.org/accessibility/ .
Comments about the standard can be left in an IMS public
forum: http://bit.ly/QvdjGb

A free webinar on AfA v3.0, hosted by EASI (Equal Access to
Software and Information), an organisation that provides
online training on accessible IT, will take place on 17
December. To register, visit: http://easi.cc/clinic.htm#december
.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=788


++News in Brief:

+04: Shock Stats: One third 33% of disabled adults in the UK
(3.89 million people) and 70% of people aged 75 and over
(3.24 million people) have never used the internet according to
the Office of National Statistics’ latest ‘Internet Access
Quarterly Update’. According to report, which contains figures
for the third quarter of 2012, “individuals with a disability are
just over three times more likely never to have used the
Internet than individuals with no disability:”

Quick link: http://bit.ly/TjgocL


+05: Nudge Online: A new report has made a number of
suggestions for tackling the digital exclusion of elderly people,
including for government and the private sector to put more
emphasis on “co-design” in the technology sector – that is,
involving older people in the design of online services. The
report, “Nudge or compel: can behavioural economics tackle
the digital exclusion of older people?” was produced by the
International Longevity Centre, a think-tank specialising in
ageing and population change:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/VfEzer


+06: Directive Proposed: A directive to increase the
accessibility of public sector websites across Europe has been
proposed by the European Commission. The proposal would
introduce mandatory accessibility standards from the end of
2015, for 12 different types of website, based on Level AA of
version 2.0 of the international Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG 2.0). The proposal complements the
European Accessibility Act to improve the accessibility of
goods and services in the European market, which the
European Commission is also preparing:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/SryMy4

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Career Opportunity? Our regular correspondent Clive
Lever, Diversity and Equality Officer at Kent County Council,
writes in to respond to the online comment published in our
last issue from a reader using the pseudonym “Deaf”.
Following our earlier piece commenting on Channel 4’s failure
to caption paralympic TV coverage, “Deaf” had written in to
point out: “There are many qualified stenographers who can
type at the minimum of 200-220 words per minutes with at
least 98% accuracy.”

Now Clive writes in to add: “In the days before word
processors, many of those stenographers would have been
blind audiotypists.

“In these times, when only half of disabled people of working
age, and only one-fifth of people with visual impairments of
working age have jobs, is there not potential for a career
opportunity for blind typists?”

[Comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Profile Feature
Ro O’Shay

+08: The World at My Fingertips

After training as a clinical support worker, US-based blogger
Ro O’Shay was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 2006,
before losing her sight in 2008. Since then, the internet and
new communications technologies have gradually become a
lifeline for her, and she is now a keen writer and technology-
user. Tristan Parker talks to her about her passion for
technology.

TP: Please give us some background on yourself.

ROS: I grew up sighted in Arizona, without the kinds of
technology young people grow up with today. I lived at home
and went to college and eventually decided on phlebotomy [the
process of collecting blood from patients for examination] as a
career. In 2006 my right eye went blind and I was diagnosed
with multiple sclerosis. The internet and my PC quickly
became my link to the world as I adjusted to suddenly being
disabled. I became a moderator on a mental health forum and
that was a huge sense of pride and accomplishment for me.
When I suddenly became completely blind in 2008, all that
was taken from me.

TP: How do you use technology and how does it benefit you?

ROS: I was without technology for eight months when a friend
gave me an iPod nano. It had spoken menus! I called Apple,
wondering what else they might have. It was explained to me
that all their computers had built-in screen readers. I had heard
about screen readers for Windows but the cost made me ill. I
went to the Apple store and was able to log in and post on the
mental health forum using the Mac screen reader, Voiceover. I
could just afford the least expensive MacBook and began to
painstakingly teach myself how to use it.

TP: Do you use other technologies - online tools, screen-
readers, anything else?

ROS: I have an iPhone 4 that, next to my MacBook, is the most
important piece of technology in my life. I have a typing app
called Fleksy that really made using my iPhone all the easier
and I have since gotten an app that scans and reads text, an app
that scans barcodes and gives me product information, I am
able to access my bank account with an app, I can listen to
baseball games when I’m out of the house, I have a GPS app
that helps me know where I am – the list goes on.

I’m able to read books with iBooks and I keep audio books
with me as well, and the calendar app has been a lifesaver. Just
about every app that comes with an iPhone is accessible and
even most third party apps are. App developers are becoming
more and more familiar with Voiceover on all iDevices and a
lot of them are receptive when the blind and low vision users
have suggestions for accessibility.

TP: You seem a very prolific writer on your blog. Is this one of
your main activities when you’re online?

ROS: Blogging used to be one of my main activities online. I
started my blog after I decided to begin the journey of getting a
guide dog and that was just another way I began meeting
people. I met one of the close friends I mentioned earlier
because of the blog.

I found other blogs written by people who had lost their vision
later in life and it helped me feel connected and find others
like me. I was also helping people without even knowing it,
and I had this entire fellowship of blind and low-vision people
grow up around me, as well as puppy raisers and other dog
people who helped me prepare for my life with a guide dog.
My blog is very important to me and I recently had to move it
to WordPress because Blogger made some changes that deeply
impacted accessibility negatively. I was resistant to the move
but am now grateful for it.

While my blog is still active I spend most of my online time on
Twitter using an accessible Mac client called YoruFukurou. It
has become another hugely important window to the world for
me. Twitter leads me to websites I want to read and my blog
friends link their new posts there. It has become a sort of one-
stop-shop for the internet, putting all my interests into one
easy-to-access place. One of my fears is that Twitter will
change things so that my client will no longer work and then
Twitter will not be nearly as easy to use as it is now.

TP: What are the main usability aspects you look for in a
computer, and on a website?

ROS: I’m spoiled since the only computer I’ve used since
going blind is a Mac. If it’s not a Mac, I’m not interested. The
built-in screen reader and the fact that it works so well with
Mac software has me a loyal customer. When it comes to
websites, I like a nice headings structure I can use to quickly
“glance” at the page and get an idea of the layout. Plain text is
my friend since obviously image-based content is something
Voiceover can’t read to me. Image descriptions are nice and
clearly labelled buttons and links are a must.

Embedded media is a problem, since Voiceover and Flash
aren’t always friends, so I like direct links. YouTube is great
since content plays automatically, though I don’t like content
that plays automatically on a page I’m not expecting. It drowns
out my screen reader and makes it difficult to navigate. Pages
that are pretty for the sighted might be completely inaccessible
to screen readers.

TP: Do you think that more organisations are now making their
websites accessible to blind and visually impaired computer
users?

ROS: Yes. I think screen reading technology information is
becoming more widespread, but technology changes so
incredibly quickly that one site I visit today might go through
an overhaul and be completely inaccessible the next. Here in
the States it is law that government sites be accessible, which is
great, but those laws haven’t expanded beyond government,
that I know of.

Commercial sites such as Amazon are fairly accessible now
and have been open to suggestions. I use Amazon a lot, and so
I worry that one day when I visit, something will suddenly
have changed. Lately, I have found that restaurants pose the
biggest problem, either using images for their menus or putting
the menus into a jumbled PDF file. It can be infuriating but it
seems to me to be rarer and rarer that I am turned away from a
website due to inaccessibility.

TP: What benefits can using technology and getting online
bring to people with disabilities?

ROS: The benefits are endless. For me, the biggest benefit is
the fellowship. The fact that I never have to be alone is huge. I
can just jump on Twitter or read blogs or carry on a
conversation with someone clear across the pond over email.
For me, information is secondary to the people I get to interact
with. From blind friends in Canada or Texas or New York or
Ireland to fellow Tampa Bay Rays baseball fans in Florida, I
am never alone. The world is at my fingertips, just like it was
when I could see.


Ro O’Shay’s blog, In The Center of The Roof, can be found at:
http://www.centerroof.com/ .

Her Twitter profile is: @Raynaadi

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=786


[Section Three ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2012 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 153 ends.]
