++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 151, September 2012.

In Association With Go ON Gold:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk/ .

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 151 Contents.

01: Internet Use Cuts Depression In Elderly, Study Finds
- US university tracks up to 28% boost for mental wellbeing.

02: DOTCOM Maps Out European Disability Laws
- Commission-funded database maps policy across the
continent.

03: “Smart TVs” To Be Scrutinised For Accessibility
- update on access guidelines for internet-connected TVs.

News in Brief: 04: Travel Companion – train journey planner;
05: Equipment Provided – US fund supports deaf-blind
communications users; 06: Video Advice – TV and radio
guidance; 07: eInclusion Achievers – learning difficulties
website wins award.

Section Two: Profile Feature: - Simon Stevens.
08: A High Flyer in Two Worlds: Tristan Parker talks to award-
winning entrepreneur Simon Stevens about the power of
technology to overcome prejudice and isolation for people with
disabilities. Additional research by Carrie Saint Freedman.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Internet Use Cuts Depression In Elderly, Study Finds.

Elderly people who regularly use the internet are less likely to
suffer from depression, new research from a US university has
found.

The research, from the University of Alabama at Birmingham,
found that regular internet usage in retired Americans aged 50
and older reduced depression by 20-28% and helped promote
mental well-being among this group.

The definition of regular internet use was based on people’s
own answers to the question: “Do you regularly use the World
Wide Web, or the Internet, for sending and receiving e-mail or
for any other purpose…?”) and depression was classified by
the ‘eight-item version’ of the Center for Epidemiologic
Studies’ Depression Scale – a commonly used method for
measuring depression.

“Internet use and depression among older adults” was
compiled by Shelia Cotten, George Ford, Sherry Ford and
Timothy Hale using existing data from a survey covering both
internet usage and health among US adults aged 50 and older,
conducted as part of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS),
an ongoing study into ageing by the University of Michigan.

The University of Alabama at Birmingham study notes that
much prior research on the relationship between internet use
and depression among older adults has been based “on small
samples, which limit the statistical sophistication and the
robustness of the findings”. The HRS sample was larger,
surveying 7,839 older adults who are retired and not living in a
nursing home.

The new research concludes: “Internet use reduces the
probability of a depression categorization for older adults by
about 20%–28%. The effects of Internet use on depression are
large and positive, resolving, at least to some extent, the lack of
evidence supporting the Internet’s impact on depression among
older adults.”

Dr Cotten told E-Access Bulletin that the most important
finding of this study is that “there is a strong and robust effect
of Internet usage on depression. What this means is that
regardless of the statistical analysis techniques used, internet
users were 20%-28% less likely to be classified as depressed.
This suggests that we should be encouraging more older adults
to become Internet users.”

Dr Cotten said other research she has conducted in this area
shows that “using the internet provides a way for older adults
to find information, garner resources, and communicate with
members of their social networks. The ability to stay in touch
with others and find support when needed are likely
responsible for the beneficial impacts of Internet use on mental
health among older adults.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=765 .


+02: DOTCOM Maps Out European Disability Laws.

A searchable online database of laws, policies, strategies and
initiatives upholding the rights of people with disabilities has
been launched to measure how well European nations are
implementing the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities.

“DOTCOM: the Disability Online Tool of the Commission” (
http://www.disability-europe.net/dotcom )
has been developed by the Academic Network of European
Disability Experts (ANED) – in collaboration with the
European Commission and EU Member States – building on
the commission’s European Disability Strategy 2010-20.

The information, taken from 34 countries, is organised into
eight themes: UN convention status; general legal framework;
accessibility; independent living; education; employment;
statistics and data collection; and awareness and external
action.

Data can be searched by country, group of countries, theme or
sub-category – for example the three sub-categories of
accessibility law are transport accessibility; built environment
accessibility; ICT and web accessibility.

Searching for the UK’s ICT accessibility laws and policies
brings up the following results, including information on the
Equality Act 2010 and the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines:
http://bit.ly/PmjM1R .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=763 .


+03: “Smart TVs” To Be Scrutinised For Accessibility.

Accessibility features for “connected TVs” or “smart TVs” –
television sets which can access internet content – are being
examined by a working group from the Digital TV Group
(DTG), the UK’s industry association for digital television.

The work will include an updating of guidelines first published
in a 2011 TV usability document from the DTG usability
group, which has been renamed the accessibility group to
incorporate wider interests.

“The UK Digital TV Usability and Accessibility Guidelines” –
nicknamed the U-Book – offer advice for manufacturers of
digital TV receiving equipment on how to incorporate
accessibility features into their products, including audio
description services and text-to-speech conversion. The DTG
accessibility group will be updating the U-Book in the autumn
to include internet content on TVs.

“The guidelines are intended to document the best practice for
supporting accessibility and are there to provide a reference
tool for industry”, Simon Gauntlett, Technology Director at
DTG, told E-Access Bulletin.

“Increasingly, we will see the integration of TV services and
web-based content, and it is essential that, in the development
of new types of services, accessibility is not compromised.”

The U-Book is available by email on request from the DTG
website:
http://www.dtg.org.uk/publications/books.html .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=761 .


++News in Brief:

04: Travel Companion: A website to help disabled people plan
train journeys has been launched by the Association of Train
Operating Companies (ATOC). ‘Rail Travel Made Easy’,
developed for ATOC by consultants Wideaware, features a
journey planner including information and pictures on station
layouts; information on booking a passenger assistance service;
and travel tips for passengers with disabilities:
Quick link:  http://www.railtravelmadeeasy.co.uk/


+05: Equipment Provided: A 10 million US Dollar national
distribution programme for equipment and technology to help
deaf-blind people access telecommunications services has been
launched in the US. The project was unveiled by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) as part of its drive to
fulfil the Twenty-First Century Communications and Video
Accessibility Act. Some 53 organisations across the US have
been chosen to become official distributors of equipment in
the programme:

Quick link:  http://fcc.us/NXCdsE


+06: Video Advice: Two new videos advising designers,
manufacturers and content providers on making digital
products and services more accessible for blind and visually
impaired people have been released by the Royal National
Institute of Blind People (RNIB). Entitled ‘Making TV catch-up
and on-demand services more usable for people with sight
loss’ (video 1) and ‘Making digital radios more usable for
people with sight loss’ (video 2), the videos address a range of
design and usability issues and provide advice on how to
resolve them. The videos are available on RNIB’s YouTube
channel:

Quick link to video 1: http://bit.ly/Mu3rdK

Quick link to video 2: http://bit.ly/MZUhBf


+07: eInclusion Achievers: A website to help young pupils with
learning difficulties improve their quality of life through ICT,
by teaching ICT skills and allowing access to content that might
otherwise be difficult for them to access is among the recently-
announced winners of the 2012 e-Inclusion Awards. The WAI-
NOT project, designed to be used in special education schools,
won the ‘I am part of IT’ prize at the awards, which were set
up by the European Commission to recognise good practice in
tackling digital exclusion across Europe. Siemon Dekelver,
who has Down’s syndrome, has become an ambassador for
WAI-NOT, after using the site to write emails, read newspapers
and for learning:

Quick link: http://www.e-inclusionawards.eu/

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Two: Profile Feature:
- Simon Stevens.

+08: A High Flyer in Two Worlds
by Tristan Parker.

Simon Stevens is a high achiever. A manufacturing and
business graduate of Coventry University, he now works as an
independent disability consultant, trainer and activist and has
provided accessibility consultancy to eBay, lectured to students
at universities, and helped organise and run European youth
seminars.

He has even appeared in a Channel 4 TV comedy series, ‘I’m
Spazticus’ – a new take on the hidden camera prank show –
which ran in August during the run-up to the Paralympic
Games and can still be viewed on the channel’s “4oD” online
catch-up service.

Stevens, who has cerebral palsy affecting his speech, mobility,
hand control and balance, is also a techno-wizard. He uses a
PC, iPad and Lightwriter text to speech communication aid, and
says such advances have benefited him hugely in day-to-day
life.

“Technology enables me to do so many things and to be an
independent, active citizen”, he says. “Without computers,
email and internet... I would not be able to work from home, I
would be more socially isolated, and it would be harder to do
my banking, my shopping and order takeaways to be delivered.
Most importantly it would be much harder to have a voice in
society as a contributing citizen and be able to be heard in the
way I believe I am.”

As long-term readers of E-Access Bulletin will also be aware,
Stevens is also a pioneer in the popular online virtual world
Second Life, becoming its first full-time virtual wheelchair user
– meaning his online character or “avatar” is also in a
wheelchair – when he joined in 2006. “While this felt very
normal for me, I was unaware of the impact my decision to use
a wheelchair made on others,” says Simon. “I have been
interviewed in top mainstream media, like BBC World Service,
about the issue, and it has been studied and researched by
people all over the world.”

Soon after joining, Simon opened ‘Wheelies’, the world’s first
disability-themed virtual nightclub in Second Life, with the aim
of it being a friendly and inclusive place for disabled and non-
disabled people from around the world to meet and have a
virtual dance to the club’s music. In 2008, Simon was awarded
the UK Catalyst ‘Revolutionary’ Award by then-Prime Minister
Gordon Brown for his work on Wheelies.

Simon believes it is important for people with impairments to
recognise the solutions that technology can provide, although
he is aware that cost can be a significant barrier. It can
expensive to replace a computer or tablet computer that may
only last several years, with the added difficulty of finding
reliable repair services when needed, he says.

Despite this, Simon believes that technology can be a key
factor for increasing the ability of disabled people to become
“modern, contributing citizens.” He says: “The internet gives
everyone direct power over their lives and the ability to express
themselves… in a way no previous generation has had. The
technology has its practical difficulties, but it is far more
accessible in comparison with other methods of
communication, and therefore is an equaliser for so many
disabled people.”

The achievement of which Simon is proudest is his 2004 award
in the ‘Community’ category of the first Enterprising Young
Brits Award. “The reason it was my greatest achievement was
that it was a mainstream competition where I was the only
disabled finalist, and as someone with a speech impairment
who has faced a lot of prejudices in my life, it is a true
recognition of how far technology has enabled me to make a
difference.”

As for the future, he says: “I would like to continue to make a
difference and demonstrate what someone with a significant
impairment can achieve with the assistance of technology. I
also look forward to the continuing improvement of
technology, where we can achieve more and more in a way
that is easier and easier.”

NOTE: Simon is a video champion for Go ON Gold, a new
national campaign to promote awareness of the barriers
disabled people face in accessing technology, and help people
overcome those barriers. The campaign is supported by E-
Access Bulletin, To find out more, including an exclusive
video interview with Simon Stevens, see:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk/

And to find out more about Simon and his work, visit his
website: http://www.simonstevens.com/ .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=758 .

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2012 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 151 ends.]
