++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 157, April 2013.
 
A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
In association with Go ON Gold:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk .
 
Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .
 
 
++Issue 157 Contents.
 
01: Accessible Copyright Treaty Hits New Roadblock
- Warning that five-year talks may produce little of value.
 
02: Great Expectations Of e-Book Access Demonstrations
- London Book Fair event charts publishing industry progress.
 
03: Location Networking Aims To Help Disabled People
Connect
- New app could help build local communities of support.
 
News in Brief: 04: Cynthia Waddell – the sad passing of a
world pioneer; 05 Money Talks – UK cash machine access; 06:
Travel Prize – app awards.
 
Section Two: Inbox.
07: Visible Speech – “Google glasses” concept for seeing
spoken words; 08: QUAIL Concerns – automated web checker
response.
 
Section Three: Profile - Erik Weihenmayer, Adventurer.
09: Scaling The Heights Of Possibility: Erik Weihenmayer has
climbed the highest mountains on all continents and is
currently planning to kayak the Colorado Rapids – yet he is
blind. Courage, determination and technology are all part of his
formula for success, described in this article from Italian
newspaper La Repubblica.
 
[Contents ends].
 
 
++Section One: News.
 
+01: Accessible Copyright Treaty Hits New Roadblock.
 
The World Blind Union (WBU) has reacted angrily to a new
setback to long-running work on an international copyright
treaty which could improve access to accessible books for
blind and visually impaired people.
 
The union has been a key negotiator in talks at the World
Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) which have been
going on for almost five years. Following the latest round of
talks from 18-20 April in Geneva, the WBU released a
statement saying the discussions “devoted almost no time to
insuring that the treaty will encourage the cross border sharing
of desperately needed books for the blind”, concentrating
instead on protecting the rights of existing copyright holders.
 
One of the main areas the WBU has been trying to negotiate is
for exceptions in copyright laws which govern the sharing
between countries, which would allow easier access to
accessible versions of books and other materials.
 
When a “roadmap” for formalising a treaty was approved in
October last year, WBU Vice Chair Dan Pescod had told E-
Access Bulletin it signalled the “finish line” in sight. However,
Pescod also warned against the creation of a “trophy treaty”
which would have little or no use in allowing books to be
shared more easily (see E-Access Bulletin 152:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=776 )
 
This threat now seems to be growing. In a statement about the
meeting, Fred Schroeder, First Vice President of the World
Blind Union, said: “WBU is alarmed that some of the
negotiators have focused their efforts almost exclusively on
crafting language around copyright protections that have
nothing to do with the ability of authorised entities to produce
books for the blind and visually impaired.”
   
A two-week diplomatic conference will now take in place in
Morocco in June to finalise the wording of the treaty and
discuss how it will be implemented. The latest draft can be
viewed in PDF from the links below.
 
Treaty draft – short link in PDF: http://bit.ly/17evViL
 
Treaty draft – full link in PDF: http://www.ip-
watch.org/weblog/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Draft-text-
SCCR-VIP-20-April-2013.pdf
 
And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=861
 
 
+02: Great Expectations Of e-Book Access Demonstrations.
 
Accessibility is “rising up the agenda” of the publishing
industry as awareness grows of the value of helping people
access electronic books in multiple formats, a publishing
standards body said this month.
 
The statement came following a live demonstration of
accessible readings from “Great Expectations” by Charles
Dickens at the London Book Fair in an event organised by the
Royal National Institute of Blind People, the Publishers
Licensing Society and EDitEUR – the trade standards body for
the global book industry.
 
Technologies demonstrated live included font size adjustment
on the Kindle e-reader; a text-to-speech reader; and use of an
iPod to produce both text-to-speech and a Braille output linked
to a Bluetooth Braille display.
 
Helen Gunesekera, Media Development Officer (Publishing
and Reading) at RNIB, told E-Access Bulletin said the live
Braille display demonstration in particular struck a chord with
the audience. “Being able to see the Braille display in action
really caught the imagination of people in the audience, few of
whom were aware that this was technically possible,”
Gunesekera said.
 
Speaking to E-Access Bulletin after the event Mark Bide,
Executive Director of EDItEUR, said accessibility is “rising up
the agenda” in the publishing industry. He said there are now
good levels of compliance with a 2010 recommendation by the
Publishers Association that text-to-speech be routinely enabled
on all e-books across all platforms, except where there is an
audiobook edition commercially available.
 
“It’s not at the top of the agenda but things have improved
enormously over the last four or five years. There is a
recognition that there are a number of very good reasons for
making e-books accessible, one of which is market-driven: by
bringing what has previously been a very specialist activity to
the mainstream, you actually increase the overall market.”
 
Bide said progress was founded on the Joint Statement on
Accessibility ( http://bit.ly/12IZBUl ), a pledge issued by the
Publishers Association in April 2012, asking for sector-wide
support across the publishing industry to improve e-book
accessibility (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 147:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=714 ).
 
And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=858
 
 
+03: Location Networking Aims To Help Disabled People
Connect.
 
A free smartphone app that can help disabled people find and
connect with others in their community and request social
support has been launched in the UK.
 
MiFinder combines elements of social networking platforms
with GPS satellite location, allowing users to engage and
potentially meet with people nearby them who share similar
interests. The app has a range of potential uses – including
dating – but is unusual in promoting its use for social support,
its owner says.
 
Users create a profile on the app and can choose to input
personal information, including whether they consider
themselves disabled. Users then write a short description of
why they are using the app – for dating, to make new friends,
or to find social support if they feel isolated – and the kind of
people they hope to connect with. The app then shows where
other MiFinder users with similar profiles are located, including
those who may be in the same area at the same time. Users can
switch off their precise location if they do not feel comfortable
disclosing it to others.
 
MiFinder founder and CEO Gabriel Saclain told E-Access
Bulletin that he hopes that eventually, if enough users join, the
app will provide a unique means of engagement for people
who may be isolated and lack the opportunity to meet others
near where they live.
 
“I did know of other location-based apps which were much
more focused on dating and things like that, but I felt there was
a need for something which was much more community-
focused, that allows people to get to know other people in real-
time, using GPS”, Saclain said.
 
As well as allowing users to build up social connections and
engage with similar communities nearby, MiFinder will be
developed to give support groups – such as organisations that
offer support to disabled people, for example – a real-time
presence, he said.
 
Short link to MiFinder:
http://bit.ly/ZAdfnj
 
Full link to MiFinder:
http://www.mifinderapp.com/page/mifinder/8/
 
And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=856
 
 
++News in Brief:
 
+04: Cynthia Waddell: A wave of tributes has followed the sad
death in April of accessible web design pioneer Cynthia
Waddell, who will be deeply missed by the world technology
community. Waddell contributed hugely to advancing the
cause of IT equality for disabled people in the US, writing the
country’s first accessible web design standard in 1995. These
paved the way for Electronic and Information Technology
Accessibility Standards legislation, known as Section 508,
which used the public procurement process to have a huge
impact on how technology companies design their products
and services. Cynthia also founded and was executive director
of the International Center for Disability Resources on the
Internet, which under her leadership has tirelessly championed
universal design and equal opportunities:
 
Short link: http://bit.ly/ZBg47H
 
Full link:  http://itu4u.wordpress.com/2013/04/05/accessibility-
loses-a-great-champion/ 
 
+05 Money Talks: Two of the UK’s major banks, RBS and
sister company NatWest, are the latest to commit to introducing
“talking ATMs” to help blind and visually impaired customers
operate their network of cash machines around the UK.
Around 80% of RBS and NatWest’s 4,800 ATMs will be
speech-enabled, with work beginning in early 2014 and
concluding by the end of 2015, following a long-running
campaign from the Royal National Institute of Blind People
(RNIB). Six other financial services and cash machine
companies – Barclays, Lloyds, Nationwide, LINK, Co-
operative and Visa – have also signed up to the campaign:
 
Short link: http://bit.ly/17r3jkD
 
Full link:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/getinvolved/campaign/yourmoney/cash
machine/Pages/ATM_Latestnews.aspx
 
+06: Travel Prize: Transport for London (TfL) have launched a
competition to find an app that relays real-time travel
information in formats accessible for disabled or elderly users.
Anyone is free to enter and develop an app, and the winner
will receive up to £5,000. The competition is being run in
association with the One Voice for Accessible ICT Coalition,
and the deadline for entries is 30 August:
 
Short link: http://bit.ly/12pRR9B
 
Full link:
http://www.tfl.gov.uk/businessandpartners/syndication/27319.a
spx
 
 
[Section One ends].
 
 
++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Remote Captioning.
 
Remote Captioning enables deaf people to participate with
confidence in meetings, lectures and conference calls. It
delivers accurate and fast captions of everything that is said to
a website for a deaf person to read. Costing just £65 per hour,
and with same day booking, it means deaf people can have the
communication support they need, on the go and on demand.
All that is needed to use the service is access to the internet,
and it can be accessed on a smart phone or tablet.
 
For details visit:
http://bee-communications.com/remote-captioning.htm
 
[Sponsored Notice ends].
 
 
++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.
 
Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .
 
+07: Visible Speech: Keith Paterson, a volunteer web trainer
for older people, posted onto our website following last issue’s
piece on training courses for blind and visually impaired
people on the “Georgie” package of smartphone apps that can
help with communication.
 
His comment relates to his own imaginative idea about possible
new digital technologies to help people with impaired hearing,
building beyond the world of mobile apps to Google glasses.
 
“I have good vision but my hearing is almost gone”, Paterson
writes. “Fortunately I have a cochlear implant which is a
tremendous help. However it is very surprising to me that I
have yet to see a proposal for Google glasses to be used in
connection with speech recognition so I can SEE what people
are saying.
 
“With a billion hard-of-hearing people worldwide there is a
great need for this and it is something I have been pushing for
over ten years. Speech recognition on things like this iPad I use
has come on tremendously, so it is just a question of time
before Google or someone catches on. But the glasses are more
likely to sell to gadget freaks who want to show off or watch
the sport while walking around!”
 
Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com or add your
response online at:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=836 .
 
+08: QUAIL Concerns: Following the piece in our last issue
“Web Content Accessibility Checker Pitched At Wider
Audience”, which described an updated version of free web
content accessibility checker QUAIL ( http://quailjs.org/ ),
reader Steve Faulkner posted onto our website with some
concerns.
 
“While the concept of QUAIL is interesting, the default
guideline set contains a significant amount of tests that are out
of date or incorrect, which may lead developers into
unnecessary code additions or additions that do not have the
desired benefit”, Faulkner said.
 
“Until the default set of tests match reality QUAIL should be
treated with extreme caution.”
 
However, Steve’s comment prompted a further reassuring
response from Mike Gifford, President of Canadian open
source web development group OpenConcept.
 
“This [QUAIL] is a great project, because it is open source”,
Gifford said. “It does take a while to build and maintain any
test. Folks should consider adding to the issue queue if they
find tests that are insufficient:
https://github.com/kevee/quail/issues
 
“It’s a great start to get content editors more aware of the
accessibility challenges of their work. No automated tool will
catch everything though.”
 
Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com or add your
response online at:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=834 .
 
[Section Two ends].
 
 
++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.
 
When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.
 
Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.
 
Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging
 
Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org
 
[Sponsored Notice ends]
 
 
Section Three: Profile
- Erik Weihenmayer, Adventurer.
 
+09: Scaling The Heights Of Possibility.
 
Erik Weihenmayer has climbed Mount Everest, the world’s
highest mountain, and descended Mount Elbrus, the highest
peak in Europe, skiing to base camp. Now he is preparing to
ride the rapids of the Grand Canyon’s Colorado River in a
kayak. Extreme sports always offer extreme challenges, but for
Weihenmayer, the level of difficulty is different: he is blind,
after contracting retinoschisis at the age of three.
 
Weihenmayer, 44, an American of German origin, lost his sight
gradually until his eyes were removed as a teenager and as a
young man, to be replaced with prosthetics. “I was not afraid
of going blind, but of ending up marginalised,” he told Lukas
Eberle, a writer at the German newspaper “Der Spiegel”.
“Sometimes it’s frustrating, it’s a daily struggle with yourself
and with your limitations that you would almost pull out your
hair,” said Weihenmayer.
 
After graduating with honours he took a teaching job, but soon
decided the quiet life was not for him.
 
“At the end of the 90s I decided to take the plunge and to
devote myself to sports”, Weihenmayer says. He began by
climbing Mount McKinley, the highest mountain in North
America, then Kilimanjaro. But that wasn’t enough; nothing
seemed to satisfy his desire to prove to himself and to others
his ability to achieve what seemed to be impossible.
Accompanied by a helper, he went to Vietnam with a mountain
bike tandem, and rode across the country for 1,740 km.
 
Today Weihenmayer relates his exploits at meetings and
conferences where tens of thousands of people come to listen.
He is in demand everywhere, from his native US to Hong
Kong, Thailand, Chile and Germany.
 
“There are some days in your life when everything is as
difficult as if you were blind and had to climb a mountain”, he
says. “But you must not be defeated by those days. They can
transform you into pioneers, they can make you turn lead into
gold”. Weihenmayer earns a good living as a lay preacher of
the courage to live: only Bill Clinton and a few other speakers
are paid more than him.
 
His most extreme adventure was climbing Mount Everest, the
roof of the world. Erik’s Nepalese Sherpas, seeing him move
easily and nimbly, could not believe that he was blind. They
tried to gently take away the snow and the ice from his face to
check if he could see, and in the end he had to take out one of
his artificial eyes and show them his empty orbit to persuade
them.
 
Being a sightless champion of extreme sports is tough.
Weihenmayer has developed some personal techniques and
systems: when climbing a mountain, he wears special
sunglasses with an integrated minicam, transmitting signals to a
sensor. This sensor is connected to his tongue by a cable, and
he has learned to use it to recognise the shape of rocks. When
skiing or racing, he always has a helper, but he has learned to
distinguish between each type of soil, from sand to asphalt, by
the sound of his footsteps and the surrounding noises.
 
“I partially put my life in the hands of others, of those who
accompany me; only sport can give me this special feeling of
confidence”, he says. “When I am on a mountain, or in the
most remote places, I take a great delight in this feeling, as I
cannot see the splendid views around me.”
 
Weihenmayer has founded a charity, “Soldiers to Summits”,
which organises climbing groups with veterans from Iran or
Afghanistan, some of whom are blind, have lost their limbs or
experienced severe trauma. He gives them back the extreme
but normal sensations of life by climbing mountains from
Nepal to Ecuador.
 
Now, for his latest feat in the Grand Canyon, Weihenmayer is
being trained by US Olympic canoeist Casey Eichfeld. “I help
him to control his feelings and nerves while going down with
the kayak,” Eichfeld says, but when asked if he would ever
come down the rapids of the Colorado blindfolded, the
Olympian is clear. “Absolutely not. Never!”
 
NOTE: Article reproduced with permission from the Italian
newspaper “La Repubblica”, where it first appeared on 25
February, 2013. Written by Andrea Tarquini and translated for
E-Access Bulletin by Margherita Giordano. Our thanks to
Margherita.
 
And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=853
 
 
[Section Three ends]
 
 
++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.
 
Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.
 
You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:
 
http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++End Notes.
 
+How to Receive the Bulletin.
 
To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.
 
Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .
 
Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.
 
+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.
 
ISSN 1476-6337.
 
[Issue 157 ends.]
