++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 155, February 2013.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
In Association With Go ON Gold:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others
So they can subscribe directly, at no cost.
(subscription details at the end).


++Issue 155 Contents.

01: Courts Freeze Samsung Battle Against Apple Screen Reader
- Patent dispute in Germany has major accessibility implications.

02: Signing Avatar App Prototype Wins Global Award
- Text and speech translated into sign language by ‘Hugo’.

03: Guidelines Cover Accessibility For Homes Of The Future
- Smart meter energy systems covered in new ICT guidelines.

News in Brief: 04: Limited Access – internet use statistics; 05:
Emergency Texts – hearing-impaired service; 06: Social
Awards – Nominet seeks prize candidates.

Section Two: Special Report: Age UK’s Internet Champion –
My Online Life Began At 75.
07: A new world opened up to Brenda O’Mulloy when, at the
age of 75, she began using the internet. Since then she has
embraced a world of social networking, online shopping and
catch-up TV, becoming Age UK’s Internet Champion of 2012.
She tells her story to E-Access Bulletin.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Courts Freeze Samsung Battle Against Apple Screen
Reader

A lawsuit in Germany in which mobile handset maker Samsung
is attempting to force its rival Apple to remove the VoiceOver
screen reader function from its iPhone smartphones in the
country has been halted by the courts.

VoiceOver allows users to have content on the screen read
aloud to them. It is marketed as an accessibility aid for blind
and visually impaired users, since it can help people use and
navigate an iPhone by touch and audio alone.

In a case first brought in December 2011, Samsung had tried to
argue that VoiceOver on the iPhone, which has been a standard
feature on all iPhones since 2009, infringes on one of its
patents. VoiceOver is built-in to a range of Apple products –
including Mac computers, iPad tablet computers and some iPod
mp3 players – but Samsung’s claim relates only to the iPhone.

Titled “speech output device for data displayed on mobile
telephone converts data from display into speech data for
output via loudspeaker”, Samsung claimed patent covers the
act of pushing a button on a mobile device and having content
from the screen, including both text and icons, read out
through speech.

Apple argued that they are not in breach of Samsung’s patent,
as VoiceOver’s speech output is triggered by tapping the screen
of an iPhone and not a button. However, Samsung then
brought a second infringement case, arguing that triple-pressing
the ‘Home’ button while in VoiceOver also causes content to
be read out from an iPhone screen.

Last week, the Mannheim Regional Court in Germany ordered
a ‘stay’ or suspension on proceedings, after it found the way
Samsung presented its case for the alleged patent was invalid.

Discussing the case with E-Access Bulletin, Florian Mueller, a
patent and intellectual property analyst who has followed the
case, said: “The stay is based on the court’s assessment that
everything the patent discloses already existed at the time
Samsung applied for this patent, so the court expects the patent
ultimately to be deemed invalid for lack of novelty.”

The next stage is for the Federal Patent Court to rule on the
case, which Mueller believes is unlikely to happen before mid-
2014. The federal court could dismiss the case, but if they
were to support Samsung’s claim, Apple could be forced to
remove VoiceOver from iPhones sold in Germany, meaning
that blind and visually impaired iPhone users in the country
would no longer have access to the feature. Alternatively, the
court could partially support Samsung’s patent claim, and allow
Apple to retain VoiceOver on the iPhone, but with
modifications that keep it from infringing on the patent.

Mueller (who has written about the case and the ruling on his
blog, Foss Patents: http://bit.ly/XEtgvy ) told E-Access Bulletin
that “It’s unfortunate that a patent that relates to accessibility
was chosen by Samsung as a potential tactical weapon … I
wouldn’t have considered it inconsiderate for Samsung to ask
the court for damages, but seeking a sales ban, which could
have resulted in the removal of the feature, is what I take issue
with”, he said.

In a statement on the case, Robin Spinks of the Royal National
Institute of Blind People (RNIB) said: “VoiceOver on the
iPhone has provided an unparalleled level of access to mobile
devices for blind and partially sighted people all around the
world. Any situation which might threaten the existence and
continuing development of that functionality would represent a
clear injustice.”

Both Samsung and Apple declined to comment when asked by
E-Access Bulletin. The episode is just one of a long series of
court battles over patents between the two companies, now
running to 50 actions pending in 10 countries.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=826


+02: Signing Avatar App Prototype Wins Global Award

A Brazilian mobile app that translates Portuguese speech,
digital text and photographs of text into sign language, all using
an animated avatar, has been recognised at a global apps
awards ceremony.

The Hand Talk app ( http://bit.ly/12DovWS ) – due to be
publicly released later this year – was developed by Ronaldo
Tenório, Carlos Wanderlan and Thadeu Luz to convert written
or spoken Portuguese text into LIBRAS, the official sign
language of Brazil. The app won the category for ‘mInclusion
and Empowerment’ at the World Summit Award – Mobile (
http://bit.ly/Vrng8J ) for its potential as a communication aid
for hearing-impaired people and others who want to learn
LIBRAS.

Hand Talk translates Portuguese into LIBRAS in three different
ways: users can type directly using their mobile device,  or use
email or SMS text; the user can speak or record a voice into the
mobile device; or the user can take a photograph of text (a
newspaper headline, for example) with their mobile. For each
method, the Hand Talk 3D avatar, named Hugo, will translate
the text or speech into LIBRAS through an animation.

The app will be available for free during the second half of
2013 for iOS (Apple’s operating system) products, Android
smartphones and tablet computers, and BlackBerry
smartphones.

There are also plans to release a version of Hand Talk for the
web, Thadeu Luz told E-Access Bulletin. “With Hand Talk for
web, it will be possible to make the content of any website, like
a news portal, financial institution or public service, available
in sign language as well”, he said.

Initially Hand Talk will only translate to LIBRAS, but the app’s
developers intend to expand to other world sign languages in
the future, Luz said.

Although Hand Talk has not been released yet, there has been
a lot of positive anticipation, Luz said: “We get emails all the
time from people, saying how much our product is needed
today… The response that we get whenever we do a
presentation at a deaf school or deaf association is
unbelievable. It’s just amazing to see how excited everyone
gets because they know that Hand Talk will have a major
impact on their lives. This is our greatest reward.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=823


+03: Guidelines Cover Accessibility For Smart Homes Of The
Future

The latest version of a set of guidelines for accessible design in
ICT systems, including information on making technology-
enabled ‘smart homes’ accessible to disabled and elderly
people, has been released by a leading consultant.

The guidelines are produced by John Gill OBE, consultant in
technology for persons with disabilities and former chief
scientist at the Royal National Institute of Blind People. Gill
has compiled the guidance over a number of years, as an
introduction to building accessible systems in a wide range of
areas. A checklist, showing how different accessibility
considerations in types of ICT equipment can aid different
types of impairment, is also included.

Topics covered include telecommunications, including mobile
phones and video phones; financial transactions, including
online banking; computing, including software and web
accessibility; transport, including passenger information
systems; and e-government, including electronic voting.

One area explored in the guidelines is how to increase the
accessibility of ‘smart homes’, where technology systems or
services have been built into a home to improve the quality of
life for people including disabled and elderly residents.

The guidelines give the example of a lighting system controlled
by pressure pads. The system would automatically switch on
the relevant lights when the householder gets out of bed and
goes to the bathroom during certain hours of the night.
Additionally, a safety alarm could be set off if the householder
does not leave the bathroom after a specified time.

Recommendations for making “smart home” technology
accessible include providing voice-operated or hands-free
facilities where possible, and displaying any screen
information in a range of formats.

A new inclusion for the latest version of the guidelines is a
section on “smart meters” – newer designed electricity and gas
meters that offer real-time readings and allow users to easily
manage their energy supply. Accessibility issues advised on
include positioning and representation of the smart meter
display; options for speech output; and design of function
buttons.

Gill told E-Access Bulletin that the guidelines were written after
he began receiving enquiries from companies asking how to
design accessibility into their products. “I often find that the
designers are looking for information about accessibility since
it has been specified or mentioned by the client (typically a
service provider). This does not mean that either party has any
clear idea as to what is involved in designing an accessible
system, or how to assess it prior to deployment”, he said.

The guidelines have recently been updated, and need frequent
editing and additions because of constant changes in
technologies, legislation and standards, Gill said. New sections
on the accessibility of televisions, smartphones and tablet
computers are currently being written by Gill and his team.

The guidelines are available at:
http://www.johngilltech.com/guidelines/guidelines_list.htm .
Short Link:
http://bit.ly/VqrRIq .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=821


++News in Brief:

+06: Limited Access: More than half of UK adults who have
never used the internet have a disability – a total of 3.80
million people – according to the latest Internet Access
Quarterly Update released by the Office of National Statistics
(ONS). The figures cover the last quarter of 2012. The number
of disabled people who have never been online has dropped
slightly from the preceding quarter (3.89 million at quarter
three of 2012, as reported in E-Access Bulletin issue 153), and
is at its lowest since quarterly updates began at the beginning of
2011. However, people with a disability are still more than
three times likelier never to have used the internet than those
without a disability, the report finds.

Quick link: http://bit.ly/XiD25n .

+05: Emergency Texts: Canadian citizens with a hearing or
speech impairment will be able to communicate with 911
emergency services by text message, the Canadian Radio-
television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) has
announced. Users must register their mobile phone number
with their service provider and must also dial 911 initially in an
emergency. Staff will then be notified that the conversation
needs to proceed by text. CRTC have given
telecommunications providers until 24 January 2014 to
upgrade their networks to enable the service.

Quick link: http://bit.ly/YsSRpm .


+06: Social Awards: Nominations for internet projects that help
create positive social change are being sought for the Nominet
Internet Awards 2013. The awards include categories for
“Doing good online” – which recognises charitable initiatives
or campaigns, or those that promote charity fundraising – and
‘Online skills and training’, which recognises projects and
websites that help people to learn new skills or access
information online. Projects can be run by businesses,
charities, public sector organisation or individuals, and entries
must be submitted by 28 March 2013.

Quick link: http://nia.nominet.org.uk/ .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


+07: Section Two: Special Report
- Age UK’s Internet Champion.

My Online Life Began At 75
by Brenda O’Mulloy.

I have had a fantastic year as Age UK’s Internet Champion of
2012. First there was the honour of winning, followed by the
excitement of being broadcast live on BBC radio, speaking at
high profile conferences and events and being interviewed by a
variety of newspapers and magazines all with the aim of
extolling the virtues of using the internet in later life.

My son bought me a computer when I was 75. He connected
me to the internet and changed my life! I had been feeling very
cut off after moving away from my friends and family – my
family live 200 miles away – and the passing of my husband.

The computer was a real lifeline. It enabled me to stay
connected and later gave me more. First I learned how to send
emails and gradually moved on to other things like Facebook,
Skype and instant messaging. It wasn’t long before the internet
became something I could use for everyday life because I
learned how to do a lot more, like shop online, book flights
and theatre weekends and play games. What I love is that I no
longer have to fuss with the VHS player to record a favourite
programme, because I can catch up using iPlayer or Demand5
[the online ‘watch again’ service from Channel 5].

When I am tired or when the weather is bleak, I don’t struggle
against the elements in order to pick up the newspaper from
my local newsagent. Instead I can stay at home in the warm
and read the Daily Mail online, do a crossword or two, search
recipes and shop for the ingredients using my computer. I can
say with absolute certainty, eight years on, that the internet has
had such a positive impact on my life.

As Age UK’s Internet Champion it’s been a real privilege to
promote the benefits of the internet for everyone because it is
so accessible, and to spread the message that it’s never too late
to take that first step. Having the opportunity to share my story
to encourage others has been empowering and a true pleasure.

Age UK is about to appoint a new Internet Champion for 2013.
While I’ll be sad to relinquish my official title I’ve had so
many new experiences this year and at 83 that must be rare. I
will always be an Internet Champion at heart and will look
forward to celebrating with my successor when they are
announced in March.

NOTE: More information about Age UK’s Internet Champions
can be found at the Age UK website:
http://bit.ly/YCov2o

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=818

[Section Two ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 155 ends.]
