++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 154, January 2013.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
In Association With Go ON Gold:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others
So they can subscribe directly, at no cost.
(subscription details at the end).


++Issue 154 Contents.

01: Elderly Needs Study Could Be First “Crowdfunded” Social
Research
- Campaign group turns to internet to fund study of residents’
needs.

02: User Priorities Must Drive Accessible ICT Research, Warns
Telecoms Expert.
- Network providers must use direct input from disabled and
elderly.

03: Autism Communication App Wins Smart Accessibility
Award
- Mobility and independent living among other prizewinners.

News in Brief: 04: Mapping eInclusion – survey catalogues
assistive organisations; 05: European Feedback – feedback
requested on web access proposal; 06: Repairs Needed – Fix
The Web fights to survive.

Section Two: Inbox.
07: Net Possibilities – reader reflections on digital opportunities
for older people.

Section Three: Profile: Karen Darke, Adventurer and
Paralympian.
08: A Thirst for Adventure: Top athlete Karen Darke has had a
lifelong passion for sport and adventuring. Winning a medal at
the 2012 Paralympic Games as part of the British handcycling
team was the latest in a long line of achievements, and now she
has set her sights on further sporting goals and fundraising
quests across the globe. She tells Tristan Parker about her
sporting endeavours and how her laptop and iPhone have
become central to her everyday life.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Elderly Needs Study Could Be First “Crowdfunded”
Social Research

A study into the consumer needs of elderly and disabled
residents of a UK town could be the UK’s first piece of social
research to be “crowdfunded”, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

The project was developed by the non-profit campaign group
Eastbourne Designed For All (
http://www.eastbournedesignedforall.co.uk/ ), which aims to
pass on advice to businesses in the Sussex town on how to
design products and services to be as accessible as possible to
the area’s high proportion of elderly and disabled residents.

A local company has offered to carry out the market research
study, “Understanding Eastbourne’s Needs”, for a discounted
fee of £4,200. Eastbourne Designed For All is now using the
crowdfunding website “Peoplefund.it” ( http://bit.ly/13mXaFT
) to source this fee.

Each project on the site is allocated a target fund figure and
deadline, with backers offered rewards from the project team
depending on the size of their pledge, such as (in the case of
the Eastbourne project) free consultancy from a local business
support organisation. Pledges will only be cashed in if the full
target sum is met by the deadline.

Tom Serpell, founder and director of Designed For All, told E-
Access Bulletin the project is the first time in the UK that
crowdfunding had been used to fund research, but that it
seemed the logical choice for an organisation like theirs.

“Because we are a social enterprise we’re not funded, and it’s
difficult to raise money, so we decided crowdsourcing might
be the way forward. It provides new ways of linking people.
We’re hoping to make Eastbourne the UK’s first ‘inclusive
town’ as a result of the work.”

If the project is commissioned, Serpell expects the results to
build on findings from previous research conducted by
Designed For All partner the University of Brighton, which
revealed that town infrastructures can be difficult to negotiate
for elderly and disabled residents, due to features such as high
pavement curbs and signage being difficult to read for those
with visual impairments. At time of writing, Understanding
Eastbourne’s Needs had received £850 of its £4,200 target,
with 22 days remaining until the deadline.

Online crowdfunding is becoming an increasingly popular
method of acquiring funds for social and community projects,
with other platforms such as Spacehive also growing in
prominence.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=809


+02: User Priorities Must Drive Accessible ICT Research,
Warns Telecoms Expert

Research and investment priorities for the digital economy and
development of internet services and mobile devices must
reflect the needs of disabled and elderly people, a
telecommunications expert has warned.

In a video address to a London event on the future of
accessible ICT research
( http://bit.ly/T0SkH2 ), Dr Mike Short, vice president of
Telefónica Europe and former president of the Institution of
Engineering and Technology, said customer demand for more
accessible services has risen over the past ten years.
Accordingly, mobile network providers need to think about
different groups of users when planning for future growth,
including the benefits that universal design can offer to
everybody, Short said.

Internet access from mobile devices is also increasing, and
developments in smartphones and tablets have made it easier
for people with a sensory impairment to use these devices, said
Short, citing larger screens, more adjustable font sizes and
increased use of touch-screen technology.

However, direct information from these groups on their
priorities when using digital services and mobile devices is
needed to aid research and ensure that future services are
developed appropriately, he said. “What we don’t always have
is the right range of inputs or priorities from the accessibility
community, those people who are in some way suffering
difficulties through hearing or seeing or other issues”.

Similar input is also needed from people who are ageing and
people with long-term health conditions, Short told delegates.

Speaking to E-Access Bulletin before the event, he said mobile
apps needed to become more “generation-friendly”. “We need
to move towards a world of inclusion and internet for all,
where we’re talking about everybody having access and a
much more inclusive range of digital services available”.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=807


+03: Autism Communication App Wins Smart Accessibility
Award

A Spanish developer who created an app to help his five-year-
old autistic son communicate has won 50,000 euros at the
second annual “Smart Accessibility” awards for Android
smartphone apps, presented by the Vodafone Foundation.

Ablah ( http://bit.ly/10JJ5F6 ) is an augmentative
communication application developed by Juan Carlos
Gonzalez. Users select images, text and sounds on a touch-
screen to make the device “speak” for them.

Ablah was one of four category winners at the 2013 awards,
topping the ‘Wellbeing’ category.

The ‘Mobility’ category was won by the Jaccede app (
http://bit.ly/VF0kT1 ), which allows users to search for
locations that are accessible to people with a disability.
Information is displayed on features such as step-free
entrances to buildings and whether accessible toilets are
available, and users can contribute their own accessible
locations.

The Happen app ( http://bit.ly/VF2n9J ), winner of the
Independent Living category, is a customisable tool aimed at
those with a visual impairment and the elderly. It allows users
to easily search for popular online information such as news
and weather, and then choose the format they receive it in. For
example, someone with a visual impairment may choose to
have the information spoken to them.

The fourth category, Social Participation, was won by Starting
Blocks ( http://bit.ly/R6JETT ). This app teaches basic mobile
technology skills through eight lessons, which guide users
through key functions of touch-screen technology.

The awards, co-organised by the AGE Platform Europe
network and the European Disability Network, form part of the
Vodafone Foundation’s Mobile For Good programme, which
supports global community projects using mobile technology.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=804


++News in Brief:

+04 Mapping eInclusion: Organisations that work in the digital
inclusion sector across Europe are being asked to fill out a
survey commissioned by a research arm of the European
Commission, the Institute for Prospective Technological
Studies. The survey hopes to deepen understanding of e-
inclusion intermediaries and their work, as well as building a
map of the organisations and the services they offer. Any
organisation or centre that tackles digital inclusion or simply
provides public access to computers or digital technology is
invited to take part before 15 February:

Quick link: http://svy.mk/WAz4TY


+05: European Feedback: E-Access Bulletin readers are invited
to offer their feedback on a European Commission proposal
for a Directive of the European Parliament and Council on
“Accessibility of Public Sector Bodies’ Websites”, published in
December. The proposed directive will require public sector
websites to comply with W3C’s Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines 2.0 at the AA level. Now, Jorge Fernandes of the
accessibility team at the Portuguese Ministry of Education and
Science, would like to hear E-Access Bulletin readers’ views
on the proposals to help formulate his agency's response to the
commission. Follow the link below to read the proposals and
then email your thoughts to Jorge on: jorge.f@netcabo.pt once
you have examined them:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/SryMy4


+06: Repairs Needed: Fix The Web, an online platform that
allows disabled computer users to complain about inaccessible
websites (volunteers then contact the website owners)
continues to seek partners and resources. After initial funding
from the Nominet Trust, the project has struggled to keep going
(see also E-Access Bulletin 143: http://bit.ly/uxOEMv ), and
Gail Bradbrook, the project’s manager, has used the UN-
backed G3ict website to renew a plea for organisations to help
the project continue:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/117T1ac

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Net Possibilities: Regular correspondent Fay Rohrlach
from South Australia writes in with a response to last issue’s
item which found that many older people (70% of people aged
75 and over) have never used the internet, according to the
UK’s Office of National Statistics.

In fact there are many positive opportunities for older people,
Fay writes.

“I learned to use a computer more than 20 years ago and since
then, I just love it, I can’t leave the jolly thing alone! I’m
finding that with the use of ZoomText [a screen magnifier], I
can read comfortably off the screen.

“There are so many interesting things on there. It’s amazing
how we’ve had printed matter all the way through our lives,
that all of a sudden, we now no longer need them anymore,
yet, I just can’t imagine what life would be like without the real
thing, to be able to have a book in hand, whether it’s Braille or
print.

“I am 63 years of age now these days, and I know that our
world has not only changed, sometimes for the better, other
times maybe not, but hey, that’s life, isn't it?”

She signs off with a New Year wish: “I [hope] 2013 may bring
you all that you would wish for it to be, and those of you who
are looking for employment, will get what you want, and not
what the organisations for the blind say you should be having.”

[Comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Profile
- Karen Darke, Adventurer and Paralympian

+08: A Thirst for Adventure
By Tristan Parker

Paralympic athlete and adventurer Karen Darke has always
been a keen sports and outdoor enthusiast. At the age of 21 she
became paralysed from the chest down after a climbing
accident, but this did nothing to quell her passion for
adventure. Over the coming years she undertook numerous
intrepid – and often dangerous – trips across the globe before
training for the 2012 Paralympic Games, where she competed
as a member of the British Cycling Team.

Darke took part in several handcycling events at the London
Games, including the road race over 48km (where she captured
the headlines by crossing the finish line hand-in-hand with
British team-mate Rachel Morris) and the road time trial over
16km, in which she earned a silver medal. Recently, she has
supported Go ON Gold, a national campaign to raise awareness
of the importance of access to technology by disabled people.
Tristan Parker (TP) caught up with her (no mean feat) to ask
her about her life, plans and greatest achievements:

TP: Please give us some background information on yourself,
and how you became interested in sports.

KD: I started into outdoor sports when I was at school.
Climbing, caving, running, etc. This carried on with walking
holidays with my parents, a youth expedition when I was 17,
and mountain biking.

TP: Did your accident at 21-years-old change your outlook on
life and how you wanted to approach sporting achievements?

KD: I don’t think so. I was already keen on sport and the
outdoors so that didn’t change, but I was lucky to have a circle
of friends who enjoyed those activities and were willing to help
me find new ways to do them. A close friend died in a
climbing accident only a few months after my own accident
and that had an impact on me – it made me think about what I
could do instead of what I couldn’t.

TP: In the 2012 Paralympics you represented Great Britain in
handcycling, but you also take part in many other activities and
sports – is cycling something that you have a particular affinity
with?

KD: Yes, I’ve always been a keen cyclist, though before my
accident I preferred not to be on the roads, but on a mountain
bike (now a really old-fashioned one without suspension!).
Really, though, I just enjoy anything that takes you into the
outdoors, but particularly where you get to be in a different
position from sat in a wheelchair, feeling the wind in your hair,
your lungs working… You get the idea.

TP: Do you use any kinds of technology on a regular basis?

KD: A Mac laptop, iPhone and internet connectivity all the
time. It’s kind of central to my work and life now.

TP: Has technology made living with a disability any easier for
you?

KD: Not IT particularly, though it perhaps opens more areas of
work up, given that you don’t have to be able to walk to use
technology.

TP: What kinds of barriers do you think that people with
disabilities face in accessing and using technology and getting
online? What could be done to remove these barriers?

KD: Cost would be a barrier to some, and hassle of getting set
up. Maybe also the support to use equipment. I would love to
use more than I do on my laptop – make movies, etc, but lack
of time and know-how prevent me. Perhaps having access to
an IT buddy would be good – though I’m sure it would be
good for everybody, regardless of disability.

TP: And what kinds of benefits can technology access and
getting online bring to people with disabilities?

KD: It does help being able to access information, online
forums and websites so easily. I can get whatever information
is available about equipment developments, opinions, etc, in an
instant. When I was first injured, computers weren’t so
common, and accessing information was harder. IT is a great
way of connecting up a minority group, e.g. into sport and with
a disability.

TP: What would you say have been your greatest or most
significant achievements over the years?

KD:
- Staying positive.
- Training for the Paralympics and committing 100% to it – and
being fitter than ever at age 41.
- Overcoming barriers and challenges with groups of friends to
complete some amazing journeys (sea kayaking from Canada
to Alaska, skiing across Greenland...)

TP: How did it feel to win a medal at the 2012 Paralympics?

KD: Relief. I worked really hard for it and gave it 100 per cent
and more for the two years prior, so it was a relief that the hard
work paid off and brought a medal home. Shame it wasn’t a
Gold one, but it’s also good to have goals to chase! It’s very
special having the medal though, mainly because children love
it, so I love sharing it with them – seeing their faces light up
and hearing about their goals and aspirations.

TP: What do you have planned for the future? And are you
hoping to take part in the Rio 2016 Paralympic Games?

KD: I’m staying on the cycling squad. I’m also dabbling in
paratriathlon, as I was out at the World Championships in New
Zealand in October, and ended up winning. I enjoy the variety
with swimming and wheelchair racing as it’s been pretty
dedicated cycling, cycling, cycling for a while! However, my
main commitment is still to the bike, and I’m on the British
Cycling squad going forward with a view to Rio. But in 2013
we hope to ‘snow-bike’ from the edge of Antarctica to the
South Pole, and raise a big chunk of money for Back Up (a
charity that transforms lives after spinal cord injury). The
website is www.poleofpossibility.com. We need a nice
corporate sponsor to make it happen, but in the meantime
we’re on a training trip to Norway in January.

NOTE: This interview first appeared on the website of Go ON
Gold, the national campaign to raise awareness of the barriers
faced by disabled and elderly people in accessing technology.
E-Access Bulletin is the campaign’s official publication. To
find out more about how you can help, visit:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk/ .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=802

[Section Three ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 154 ends.]
