++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 160, July 2013.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
In association with Go ON Gold:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 160 Contents.

01: ‘Historic’ Accessible Copyright Treaty is ‘Miracle In
Marrakech’
- Surprise result signals international sharing of accessible
books.

02: BBC Issues Draft Guidelines for Mobile Accessibility
- Comprehensive advice and tips for apps and websites.

03: Talking Cash Machines Win Technology4Good Award
- Barclays Bank rolls out audio service to 84% of network.

News in Brief: 04: Support Network – online disability
support platform launches; 05: Presenting Futures –
accessibility presentation available; 06: Turning Tinder –
online centres network name change.

Section Two: Special Report – The story behind the BBC
Mobile Accessibility Guidelines.
07: Going Mobile – The BBC has issued a set of draft
guidelines and standards to improve the accessibility of its
content when accessed through a mobile device. Henny
Swan, senior accessibility specialist at the BBC, explains how
and why the guidelines were created, and the strong wider
potential for mobile devices being used by people with
disabilities.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: ‘Historic’ Accessible Copyright Treaty is ‘Miracle In
Marrakech’

An historic international treaty to increase book access for
blind and visually impaired people has finally been adopted at
a meeting of the World International Property Organisation
(WIPO) after almost six years of wrangling, negotiations and
setbacks.

Signed at a WIPO conference in Marrakech, Morocco, the
treaty will allow exceptions to copyright laws so accessible
versions of books and other printed material can be shared
internationally for blind and visually impaired people to use.
Up to now, such sharing of books has not been possible due
to objections from copyright holders in some countries.

For the treaty to now come into force, 20 countries have to
ratify it. Once this happens, any country can sign up to the
treaty by ratifying it, and would then have to abide by its
terms.

Dan Pescod, Vice Chair of the World Blind Union – a key
player in negotiations and the development of the treaty –
told E-Access Bulletin that during the last day of the WIPO
Marrakech conference, 51 countries signed the treaty, with a
signature being “a strong demonstration of intent to ratify the
treaty”. The UK was one of four EU countries to sign.

Even during this latest conference, it seemed possible the
treaty would be deferred once more or watered down, said
Pescod. He said the eventual successful outcome was such a
surprise it was dubbed the ‘miracle in Marrakech’ by some
involved.

The final treaty contains everything for which the WBU had
hoped, Pescod said, although one element that remains “less
clear” is that of commercial availability checks. “[This is] the
idea that you would only be able to use treaty if you have
satisfied the question of whether a book is already available
in an accessible format commercially [in the country you’re
sending to]. That was excluded from the export part of the
treaty.”

However, this caveat only applies to a small number of
countries – those that have a domestic commercial availability
clause in their law – and would not necessarily be
implemented by those countries, he said. The UK does have
such a law however, and the WBU is now in talks with the
country’s Intellectual Property Office to discuss the issue.

Although it represents a crucial victory in the fight for wider
accessible book access, Pescod said the signing represents the
beginning of a subsequent, new phase of work. “As much as
it was an intense and exhausting campaign … we now have a
new campaign to get countries to ratify the treaty, and with
that comes the job of explaining to people in simple terms
what the treaty provisions allow.”

Alongside this global campaign, the World Blind Union will
be helping countries and organisations to use the treaty
effectively and practically, as well as continuing to work with
publishers and software developers to promote accessible
publishing. “The treaty is only a means to that end, it’s not
the end in itself”, Pescod said.

Pescod estimates that accessible books should start being
shared across borders by 2015, after the WBU campaigns for
an initial 20 countries to ratify the treaty (which is necessary
for it to come into force), which the WBU is hoping to
achieve by the end of 2014.

“This is very much a historic and unprecedented thing that
we’ve done and we’re very proud to have done it,” said
Pescod, “but we know we’ve still got a lot of work to do to
ensure that we make a really big dent in this book famine, so
we’re not going to be resting on our laurels just because
we’ve got this treaty.”

More information on the background to the treaty can be read
in previous issues of E-Access Bulletin:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?s=wipo&x=0&y=0

The final treaty, named the ‘Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate
Access to Published Works for Persons who are Blind,
Visually Impaired, or otherwise Print Disabled’, can be
viewed from the links below in Word document and PDF:

Short link:
http://bit.ly/14Zya9O

Full link:
http://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/doc_details.jsp?doc_id=241
683

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=913


+02: BBC Issues Draft Guidelines for Mobile Accessibility

A draft set of standards and guidelines to make BBC web
content and apps more accessible when viewed on mobile
devices has been released by the corporation following a year
of testing and development.

The Draft BBC Mobile Accessibility Standards and
Guidelines were announced in a blog post by Henny Swan,
senior accessibility specialist at the BBC. Up to now the
BBC’s existing accessibility guidelines have been used as a
basis for creating accessible mobile content, Swan says, but it
was felt that more specific mobile standards were now
needed.

“We have our BBC Accessibility Standards and Guidelines
in-house, [but] these were produced in 2005 when mobile was
not as dominant as it is now”, Swan told E-Access Bulletin.
“They are also geared towards HTML and don’t speak to
designers and developers working on native apps. The same
goes for the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
[WCAG]… While much of it is suited to the mobile web it
didn’t fit what we needed exactly and wasn’t something that
native app developers or designers identified with.”

Three sets of standards and guidelines were initially
developed by the BBC, for HTML, iOS, and Android – the
three most common platforms used to access mobile content,
and also those that have “the most mature accessibility
support”, writes Swan in her blog post. These three sets were
then merged to create an overall document, covering
accessibility in a wide range of areas including: editorial;
images; design; structure; navigation; notifications, and links.
For each, there are examples of how to implement each
requirement or recommendation on all three platforms for
testing.

“The plan [now] is to write techniques for additional
platforms as and when the need arises,” writes Swan on the
blog, “but this doesn’t stop our teams applying these
standards and guidelines for Windows Phone, Blackberry
and other platforms in the meantime.”

Although the guidelines were developed for accessing BBC
content on mobile devices, Swan said she hopes other
organisations will be able to benefit from them. Feedback
from all is invited, with plans to make a final version available
in due course.

The Draft BBC Mobile Accessibility Standards and
Guidelines, short link:
http://bbc.in/128pjNL

Full link for draft guidelines:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/futuremedia/accessibility/mo
bile_access.shtml

Henny Swan’s blog post announcing the guidelines, short
link:
http://bbc.in/14fJLQ2

Full link for Henny Swan’s blog post:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/internet/posts/Accessibility-
Mobile-Apps )

NOTE: Henny Swan explains more about the BBC Draft
Mobile Accessibility Guidelines in a special report in this
issue of E-Access Bulletin:

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=911


+03: Talking Cash Machines Win Technology4Good Award

Banking and financial services company Barclays is among
winners of the Technology4Good Awards 2013, an annual
event which celebrates the potential of technology to affect
social change.

The award recognises Barclays’ use of technology in making
its services more accessible to people with disabilities and
impairments. This includes adapting more than 3,500 of its
ATMs (automated teller machines, or cashpoints) – 84% of
the bank’s network – so that they can be used with
earphones, allowing people with impaired vision, dyslexia or
other reading problems to listen to the on-screen options.

A range of brightly coloured ‘hi-vis’ debit cards, some with
guidance arrows, have also been introduced by Barclays, to
help visually impaired customers find the card easily and see
which side needs to be inserted into an ATM or card reader.

Other winners of the Technology4Good Awards – organised
by technology access charity AbilityNet – include user-led
mental health charity Self Help Services, which provides
services in the north of England, including computerised
cognitive behavioural therapy services. After an initial in-
person assessment, clients have access to a range of e-learning
resources and other digital material.

The Local Digital Champion Award was won by Norman
Hunter, who has worked with digital inclusion charity Go
ON UK to help people gain basic IT skills.

More information on the Technology4Good Awards can be
found at the event website, below:

Technology4Good Awards website, short link:
 http://bit.ly/fKLUxh

Technology4Good Awards website, full link:
http://www.technology4goodawards.org.uk/

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=909


++News in Brief:

+04: Support Network: An online social network to help
people with disabilities and their families connect with
individuals, organisations and services who can offer support
has been launched by the specialist networking company Add
My Support. Anyone can subscribe to the Disability Support
Network, and users can then make support requests for
specific assistance such as buying new assistive equipment,
help around the home, or achieving a personal goal.

Short link: http://bit.ly/166AHh6

Full link: http://disability.addmysupport.com/home


+05: Presenting Futures: A presentation on ‘The Future of
Accessibility’, delivered at the recent Birmingham event
Building Perfect Council Websites ’13 co-hosted by E-
Access Bulletin publisher Headstar, can now be viewed
online on the SlideShare platform. The presentation was
hosted by Robin Christopherson, head of digital inclusion at
technology access charity AbilityNet, and features
recommendations for accessible digital design and
information on accessibility guidelines.

Short link: http://slidesha.re/15b4Yi0

Full link: http://www.slideshare.net/AbilityNet/the-future-of-
accessibility-presented-at-build-the-perfect-council-website-
11-july-2013

+06: Turning Tinder: The technology access and training
organisation Online Centres Foundation, which manages the
national network of UK online centres, has been renamed the
Tinder Foundation. The non-profit mutual organisation will
continue to run the centres, with an emphasis on teaching
digital skills within communities.

Short link: http://bit.ly/15aZAHQ

Full link: http://www.tinderfoundation.org/

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Remote Captioning.

Remote Captioning enables deaf people to participate with
confidence in meetings, lectures and conference calls. It
delivers accurate and fast captions of everything that is said
to a website for a deaf person to read. Costing just £65 per
hour, and with same day booking, it means deaf people can
have the communication support they need, on the go and on
demand. All that is needed to use the service is access to the
internet, and it can be accessed on a smart phone or tablet.

For details visit:
http://bee-communications.com/remote-captioning.htm

[Sponsored Notice ends].



++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality
scheme, public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we
provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


Section Two: Special Report
- The story behind the BBC Mobile Accessibility Guidelines

+07: Going Mobile
by Henny Swan.

The BBC has now published a set of draft Mobile
Accessibility Standards and Guidelines to the wider web
development community, a ground-breaking project which
has been in development for a year now [see also – news,
earlier in this issue of E-Access Bulletin]. While written
primarily for BBC employees and suppliers to use, the
corporation’s hope is that they might be useful for any
individual or organisation building mobile web content and
native apps.

For years, BBC teams have used the BBC Accessibility
Guidelines to help them build accessible websites (
http://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/futuremedia/accessibility/ ).
These have also proved a useful foundation for our work on
mobile accessibility, but we felt we needed something more
targeted for mobile and responsive websites and, of course,
native applications. Furthermore the BBC Accessibility
Guidelines were produced in 2005 when mobile was not as
dominant as it is now. They are also geared towards HTML
and don’t speak to designers and developers working on
native apps.

The same goes for the widely-used Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) published by the
international Web Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide
Web Consortium: while much of the WCAG content is suited
to the mobile web, and forms the foundation of the BBC
guidelines, it didn’t fit what we needed exactly and wasn’t
something that native app developers or designers identified
with.

Moreover, while various platforms such as Blackberry,
Windows Mobile, Nokia, Android and Apple have their own
guidelines for accessibility, they tend to focus only on the
capabilities of that particular platform. So, for example, where
Apple iOS may have an in-depth focus on technical
accessibility for its built-in screen-reader, VoiceOver, their
guidance may not focus as much on visual accessibility. This
means some platform accessibility guidelines are less
complete than others or might contain some really useful
advice that could work across all platforms. In addition to
this, some advice and techniques relating to accessibility are
not highlighted as ‘accessibility’ and are buried deep within
the documentation that companies publish for developers.

Asking teams to deliver accessible and usable content against
this fragmented and unequal backdrop is unrealistic. We had
to provide a single resource that was tangible and testable to
follow rather than ask teams to follow various different sets
of guidance.

From a project management perspective, where a single
product might be available as a responsive site, an iOS app
and an Android app, it made sense therefore to develop
technology-agnostic standards and guidelines with
technology specific techniques. Teams working on deploying
the same content across devices and platforms therefore work
towards a common framework of accessibility support (as far
as the platform allows), which in turn helps us maintain a
level of consistency across devices.

What we aim to do is not simply make content consistently
accessible but to also make it a familiar and enjoyable user
experience, whether you are looking at BBC content on your
desktop or within an app. What we want to avoid are
situations such as the following, described by Leonie Watson,
a screen-reader user: “You download a new app, you start
using it and it looks really good, and feels really good, then
something frays a bit around the edges and then you’re like,
‘Ugh, here we go again!’ You kind of lose a bit of confidence
in it.”

There are other new opportunities, too. Thinking beyond the
technicalities of making content accessible, there are huge
opportunities to create apps that help disabled users access
what’s happening around them. We see this already with apps
which allow blind users to tag and then “geolocate” shops, so
when they walk down a street they know where they are. Or
apps where people can tag music or TV shows. As a
broadcaster, using mobile devices as companions to TV opens
up the opportunity to merge broadcast and web content in
new ways, to provide access to information about TV content
that is topical, live and highly accessible.

How and where we view TV, listen to radio and consume the
news is changing. These are all key mediums for any of us to
remain connected. Mobile accessibility is therefore vital to
ensure no-one is left behind.

Note: copies of the new guidelines can downloaded at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/futuremedia/accessibility/mob
ile_access.shtml

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=907

[Section Two ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message.
Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek
at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as
they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 160 ends.]
