++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 159, June 2013.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
In association with Go ON Gold:
http://www.go-on-gold.co.uk .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 159 Contents.

01: Digital Inclusion “About Everybody, Not Just Disabled
People”
- Access through new devices means inclusion is mainstream
issue.

2: Practitioners Rally To Defend Web Access Guidelines
- Concerns raised over academic attack on WCAG
effectiveness.

03: Employers ‘Need Support To Make Job Applications
Accessible’
- Charity finds range of barriers for applicants with disabilities.

News in Brief: 04: Election Access - European Parliament
website declaration; 05: Classroom Captions - Australian
students receive live text feed; 06: Tablet Teaching – iPads in
the classroom.

Section Two: Special Report - Accessible Video Games.
07: Serious Fun, Serious Business – computer games are a
major part of modern culture, but many disabled people are
excluded by their design. The result, says Ian Hamilton, can be
much more damaging than missing out on entertainment – but
help is at hand thanks to a range of accessibility initiatives
including developer guidelines.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Digital Inclusion “About Everybody, Not Just Disabled
People”.

The concept of digital accessibility simply as a means of
catering for disabled users is out-of-date: in the modern world,
digital inclusion must be understood as the need to serve
everybody, whatever their access method or device, a leading
accessibility specialist has said.

Robin Christopherson, head of digital inclusion at technology
access charity AbilityNet, told delegates at the recent national
digital conference in London, ND13, that providers of digital
content and services already need to adapt to new devices and
access methods. With more people than ever accessing
websites through mobile and other devices, we are in a
situation where “everybody is disabled from time-to-time”,
Christopherson said.

“People are accessing your content and your services while
they’re on the go – from a small screen which might be more
difficult to see, or while they’re driving they might need to
have things spoken back to them and need to control things by
voice,” he said.

“This idea of accessibility being for disabled people, I would
argue, is now anachronistic”, he said. “Digital inclusion is… by
far a preferred statement, because it talks about including
everybody, whereas traditionally, accessibility has been this
bolt-on activity to help disabled people, with additional budget,
additional skills required.”

For people with disabilities, new technologies are also opening
up new horizons, Christopherson said. Emerging technologies
such as: Google Glass, a head-mountable computer that
responds to voice commands; software that detects human
facial expressions; and the ‘Talking Goggles’ app, which
photographs an object and then tells the user what the object is,
are all opening up new frontiers of communication.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=893


+02: Practitioners Rally To Defend Web Access Guidelines.

Accessibility practitioners have defended the international
standard ‘WCAG’ web content accessibility guidelines this
month, in the wake of an academic study suggesting they were
“ineffective”.

The PhD study by André Pimenta Freire of the University of
York, as reported in E-Access Bulletin in May, said adherence
to the WCAG guidelines could not resolve many problems on
website pages encountered by print-disabled computer users. In
a series of responses on the bulletin’s website, however,
several practitioners raised objections to points raised in
Pimenta Freire’s study.

Ian Hamilton, a user experience consultant who has also
contributed this issue’s feature on accessible gaming, said the
study referred to issues such as confusing web page layouts,
which were problems for all users – not just those with
disabilities. “These are not accessibility issues, and are not
what WCAG is for”, Hamilton said. “WCAG is to help avoid
being unnecessarily excluded because of disability, and not to
guarantee that people with disabilities can use a website.”

While he said he agreed with the study’s assertion that user
testing by people with disabilities is essential to check
accessibility – and that guidelines should not be relied on alone
– he said extensive testing at all stages of a design process
would be too expensive and difficult for most organisations.

“Testing, guidelines and expert review each have their own
major inadequacies, and their own major benefits. Do all three
and they compensate for each other very nicely.”

In a further analysis, Grant Broome of DIG Inclusion said he
and his colleagues were concerned that someone reading
Pimenta Freire’s report might end up rejecting the WCAG
guidelines, when they are in fact a valuable tool.

“Many of us who use the guidelines in the real world know
how essential they are in educating web developers, unifying
objectives for browser and assistive technology developers,
and as a tool for measuring accessibility conformance metrics,”
said Broome.

“As supporters of user-testing with disabled users, we would
not promote WCAG as a be-all and end-all solution for
accessibility: there are perhaps some improvements required to
be made to the guidelines… however, we would not advocate
building a web product without a framework which includes
the support of a robust and recognised set of guidelines such as
WCAG 2.0.

“Approaching the development or testing of web products
without this framework and instead relying solely on feedback
from users is likely to result in an inconsistent and unreliable
approach to developing a site which is not based on
measurable metrics, but on individual opinion or preference.”

Broome said the study’s finding that there was no significant
difference in the number of user problems found on sites that
did not conform to the guidelines, compared with those that
did, was “troubling”, and “it is difficult for us to imagine how a
study of this depth could arrive at such an impossible
conclusion.” He said some of the problems found with non-
conforming websites in the study – such as broken links – are
in fact covered in the guidelines.

The University of York Computer Science Department said this
week it was confident
the results in the study were derived from rigorous scientific
and mathematical analysis of the data gathered. Further
detailed comment from the department has been invited by E-
Access bulletin for our next issue.

To view the original report and join in the debate, follow the
link below. Please post all comments on the topic there:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=873


+03: Employers ‘Need Support To Make Job Applications
Accessible’.

Employers need more support to make their digital job
application processes accessible to people with disabilities,
according to a new report from disability employment services
charity Shaw Trust.

The report, ‘Making work a real choice’, examines the
government’s disability employment programme Work Choice
through the experiences of more than 400 people – a mix of
job applicants, employers, and Shaw Trust staff.

Employers’ online application forms acted as a barrier for
some disabled applicants, as the process was not always
accessible, the report finds. For example, ‘time-out’ features on
some online forms, which force applicants to enter information
within a time limit, were particularly problematic for some
people with learning difficulties.

“One customer outlined how their learning difficulty prevented
them from completing a screen of an online application form
for a national company in the required time limit”, it states.
“The failure to complete the task resulted in the customer being
barred for reapplying for another job with the employer for
two years.”

To help solve this and other related problems, the report
recommends that employers should receive support to make
their recruitment processes fully accessible. Although some
government funding is already available for staff with
disabilities through Access to Work, a scheme that offers
funding for costs such as assistive equipment, this is focused
on helping people once they have secured work, the Shaw
Trust report says. “There is therefore a lack of subsidised
support for employers to help make their application processes
fully accessible. Increasing the accessibility of the application
stage, could remove another systemic barrier to more people
with disabilities entering work”, it says.

Speaking to E-Access Bulletin Ian Lyons, sales manager for
digital inclusion at Shaw Trust, said that although many
organisations are happy to fix digital accessibility problems
once they have been pointed out, most do not have the in-
house skills to consider accessibility from the outset. “In the
life-cycle of the employment process, from when a candidate
is looking for work to their first day [of employment] people
forget how much of that process is actually digital. I think most
organisations want to make employment a level playing field
for everyone, but a lot of them don’t know where to go to get
that support or to implement those processes.”

‘Making work a real choice’ can be downloaded from the
Shaw Trust website:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/120eg9v
Full link: http://www.shaw-trust.org.uk/support-us/policy-and-
research/making-work-a-real-choice-report-and-consultation/

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=895


++News in Brief:

+04: Election Access: Leaders of all political groups in the
European Parliament (EP) have signed a declaration setting out
measures to increase the rights of people with disabilities. This
includes a commitment to ensure the accessibility of all EP
websites and other information, so disabled citizens will have
equal access to campaign information for the 2014 European
elections. The signing took place during a meeting of the
political group leaders with the independent European
Disability Forum.

Quick link to declaration as Word document:
http://bit.ly/19IrAXs .

+05: Classroom Captions: Real-time captions will be delivered
directly to deaf and hearing-impaired students’ laptops in some
schools across New South Wales, Australia, after a captioning
company, Ai-Media, won a tender to provide the service. A
trained captioner will work remotely during lessons, clearly
“respeaking” teachers’ words sent to them through a
microphone. This speech is then converted into text using
specialist software and sent back to students’ laptops or tablet
computers within seven seconds.

Quick link: http://bit.ly/144tnTz

Full link: http://www.ai-media.tv/news/Ai-
Media_Wins_NSW_Education_Tender


+06: Tablet Teaching: The Royal National Institute of Blind
People is assembling a collection of resources on how tablet
computers, including iPads, are being used in schools by blind
and visually impaired students. Articles, guidance, news and
case studies on the topic are being collected by the charity, and
any schools with experience in this area are being asked to
share what they have learned:

Quick link: http://bit.ly/1ahDvNA

Full link:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/professionals/education/support/tablets/
Pages/tablets-classroom.aspx


[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Remote Captioning.

Remote Captioning enables deaf people to participate with
confidence in meetings, lectures and conference calls. It
delivers accurate and fast captions of everything that is said to
a website for a deaf person to read. Costing just £65 per hour,
and with same day booking, it means deaf people can have the
communication support they need, on the go and on demand.
All that is needed to use the service is access to the internet,
and it can be accessed on a smart phone or tablet.

For details visit:
http://bee-communications.com/remote-captioning.htm

[Sponsored Notice ends].



++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


Section Two: Special Report
- Accessible Video Games.

+ 07: Serious Fun, Serious Business
by Ian Hamilton.

Video games are now a major part of our culture, but one in
which accessibility for people with disabilities is comparatively
low. Work in this field has been accelerating greatly in the past
couple of years, however, making it a very exciting and fast-
paced area of accessibility to be involved with.

Major players include the charities SpecialEffect and
AbleGamers Foundation, and the International Game
Developers Association’s game accessibility special interest
group, alongside many other smaller groups and individuals
working on advocacy and development in industry and
academia.

A common question among people in the accessibility field is
simply – “why games?” Why should we care about a few
teenagers having a bit of fun, when there are so many other
serious challenges that need addressing?

There are two key issues here: the scale of the industry; and the
personal benefits. In terms of value the games sector is not far
short of being a twelve-figure industry, roughly on a par with
books, way ahead of music, films and DVDs and second only
to television. Already, there are more twice as many female
gamers over 18 as male gamers under 18.

Furthermore, research commissioned by US video game
developer PopCap
( http://bit.ly/PYsRwl ) showed a higher proportion of people
with disabilities among gamers than in the general population.
Games can be a huge contributor to quality of life for people
who have limited recreation options, but they also enable
access to culture and socialising, and can have therapeutic
benefits (even being prescribed by doctors in some cases). In
multiplayer games and virtual worlds, everyone is able to
participate on a level playing field, with players’ first
impressions of someone being based on how they play the
game and what they say, not on any disability they may have.

It is not uncommon to hear of games having a truly life-
changing effect. For example, one young man was in a horrific
accident which left him quadriplegic and in despair, thinking
his life was over, but he was then brought back from the brink
through discovering gaming. He had found something
meaningful that he was able to do independently. What brought
this about were game developers simply allowing button
configuration so he could move essential controls from the
front to the top of his controller, meaning that although he had
little fine motor control in his fingers, he could operate the
buttons by moving his arms and wrists.

There are a few differences to how accessibility in games
works compared to other industries. To meet the definition of
“game” as opposed to a toy or an interactive narrative, there
must be a challenge to overcome, a test of some kind of skill.
Every challenge will be a barrier for some people, so universal
design in its truest sense cannot really exist in games. However,
because games are so technology-focused, there is great
accessibility potential and a great deal that can be done to
avoid unnecessary barriers.

Some of this potential can be achieved through: inclusive
design, such as avoiding use of colour as a sole means of
communicating information; providing gamers with options
such as a choice of difficulty level or being able to configure
which button does what on your controller; and providing
support for assistive technologies such as switches or screen-
readers.

There are some very common impairments that affect gaming,
such as colour-blindness or impaired reading ability, translating
into huge amounts of lost business, yet many access problems
are cheap and easy to fix if considered early enough. The
situation is rapidly improving, but the games industry still lags
way behind others, and a large part of that is down to
awareness.

There have been many attempts over the years to produce
game accessibility resources, but these have generally been
either too short or too detailed to be a practical reference for
developers.

So in 2012 a group of game developers, accessibility specialists
and academics collaborated to produce a set of game
accessibility guidelines, divided into levels based on a balance
of reach, impact and – uniquely – cost.

The guidelines were launched in September 2012, at:
http://www.gameaccessibilityguidelines.com .

They are communicated in developer-friendly language,
together with examples of best practice, and have already been
used by many developers, publishers and universities around
the world. They have even been used by the Australian
Government as part of the application process for its 20-
million-dollar games industry funding programme.

Looking ahead, as gaming technology continues to change
rapidly, each new generation of devices will bring its own new
potential accessibility benefits and hurdles, from motion and
speech detection to touch-screen interaction and multi-touch
gestures.

Two developments that have made a really significant
difference in recent years have been mobile screen-readers and
connected gaming.

Blind-accessible games have traditionally been a highly
specialist area, but mobile devices have changed this. Users
can now navigate using a mobile screen-reader, by dragging a
finger around the screen. The screen-reader then describes
what element the user’s finger is over, meaning that the finger
can essentially be used to perform the same functions that an
eye normally would, and the user can explore the screen in a
similar way to a sighted person.

Also, unlike console games, many mobile games are based on
navigating simple interfaces rather than complex 3D
environments. These two factors combined have made it far
easier to develop blind-accessible games – so easy, in fact, that
Zynga, creators of the popular Farmville and Words with
Friends games, actually managed to make their Hanging with
Friends game blind-accessible by accident, simply by labelling
elements correctly.

Games also allow reporting back of analytics over the internet,
and this, too, has huge potential. While it is very difficult to
find out how many people enter a building using a wheelchair
ramp rather than stairs, or to know how many people accessing
your website are colour blind, in games you can find out
exactly how many of your players configure their controls or
turn on subtitles, meaning accurate business cases can be
formed.

One example of this is MUDRammer, a recent game designed
for Apple’s iOS operating system which was made screen-
reader accessible by its developer, Jonathan Hersh. Based on
prevalence statistics you might guess that 1% of the players
might be blind, but thanks to a single line of code the
developer was able to find out that up to 10% of the players
were screen-reader users. His game sells for five US Dollars, so
the 24 hours work he put into making it accessible generated a
profit “more or less immediately”, says Hersh.

Overall, there is a great opportunity at the moment to spread
knowledge, educate game developers, and build some good
foundations that will stay relevant for years to come, making a
real difference to many people’s quality of life.

NOTE: Ian Hamilton is an independent UX (user experience)
designer and consultant who contributed to the Game
Accessibility Guidelines.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=891


[Section Two ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 159 ends.]
