+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 163, November 2013.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the 
end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 163 Contents.

+01: Paralympics effect ‘challenges perceptions of disabled people’
- Campaigner and Paralympian dissect changes in public attitude

+02: Care home workers ‘lack digital confidence and skills’
- New projects launched to boost digital awareness and support.

+03: Standards developers urged to support older and disabled people
- All mainstream products and services must be inclusive, academic warns.

News in Brief: 04: Wiki Fix - accessibility patches for all; 05: Divide 
Displayed - graphic reveals digital divide; 06: Increasing Expertise - 
higher education course on accessible ICT design.


Section Two: Conference Report – eAccess 13: Debate.
07: The price of software freedom: Free and open source software is 
generally cheaper, so why is it not in wider use in the assistive technology 
sector? Dan Jellinek reports on a debate hosted by Southampton University’s 
EA Draffan.


[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Paralympics effect ‘challenges perceptions of disabled people’

The impact of the 2012 Paralympic Games on public attitudes towards disabled 
people has been positive but some campaign groups have sought to “misuse” it 
for political ends, a leading activist told this year’s eAccess conference.

And disability consultant and campaigner Simon Stevens told delegates that 
while the London Games had raised the profile of disability issues, it would 
take some time before we could judge whether the effect will be lasting.

Stevens was addressing e-Access ’13, the UK’s leading event on access to 
technology by disabled people, organised by E-Access Bulletin publisher 
Headstar. He criticised the way some charities used the Paralympics 
alongside “anti-government rhetoric”, for example. “They argue that for the 
average disabled person, the Paralympics has not distracted from the 
supposed hardship that disabled people face from this Government’s welfare 
reforms”, Stevens said. “This use of the Games to promote a prejudiced 
victimhood viewpoint… is unhelpful.”

However he said the true value of the Games for the image of disabled people 
in the UK lies somewhere between positive and negative views. “I believe it 
is important that we see the Paralympics are just as one factor of many that 
has assisted to raise the profile of disability issues… The politics of 
disability has peaked and the Paralympics has been a part of them, adding 
another dimension to the public’s understanding of disability, contrasting 
the media’s portrayal of disabled people as vulnerable and or freaks.”

It would take some time to assess the Games’ true legacy, Stevens said. “The 
trick will be how to be keep this going in the long-term, and use it to 
challenge the perceptions of disabled people as merely vulnerable objects of 
pity. I fear the public still see disabled people as a single homogeneous 
group, who all think the same… We must start showing that disabled people 
are diverse individuals that have their own unique wants, desires, 
aspirations, goals, likes and dislikes...The Games must be seem as a part of 
a wider informal movement of action that is helping disabled people to 
achieve their status as fully contributing citizens.”

Conference keynote speaker Hannah Cockroft MBE – world-record-holding 
wheelchair sprint racer and winner of two gold medals at London 2012 – said 
the rise of the internet and social media had helped boost athletes’ 
profiles. The video sharing site YouTube, for example, had hosted short 
films on individual athletes and their training. “It really made people 
watch and take notice of our abilities for the first time,” Cockroft said. 
“It helped bring the Paralympics out of the Olympic shadow and celebrate us 
[Paralympians] as elite athletes. It really made people watch and [see] our 
abilities for the first time... what we could do instead of what we can’t 
do.”

Cockroft said interest in Paralympians had carried on into 2013, partly due 
to the extensive media coverage the Games had received. It was essential for 
this kind of exposure to continue, she said, “because otherwise a nation 
seems to be able to forget the Paralympians pretty quickly.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=969


+02: Care home workers ‘lack digital confidence and skills’

Many people who work with older people and disabled people in care homes 
lack digital skills and are poorly placed to help residents use the internet 
and other vital tools, eAccess 13 delegates heard.

“We often find that the people who work with those in care are not 
particularly confident or skilled in their use of digital,” said Miles 
Maier, ICT champion at LASA, an organisation which helps charities and 
voluntary groups use technology.

To address this gap LASA has launched the Connected Care project, helping 
not-for-profit social care providers such as independent living centres, 
care homes and day care centres to use ICT more effectively, Maier said. 
Under the scheme, which has been funded by the Department of Health for 
three years, organisations receive an ICT ‘health check’ and an action plan 
to help staff become more digitally aware and boost skills.

The end goal is to enable those receiving social care to use technology more 
effectively, he said, allowing them to communicate with family and friends 
and have more control over their own care. “Our working theory is by 
providing people in social care with access to e-skills and digital 
technology, it is empowering and it is enabling,” Maier said.

In a complementary project the Disabled Living Foundation (DLF), which 
provides information on independent living, has launched a “Living Made 
 Easy” web resource, offering impartial advice on assistive products and 
technology to everyone, the conference heard.

Ed Mylles, director of business development at the charity, said the 
resource is split into eight sections, including house and home; mobility 
and walking; leisure; and communication.

Users can browse a wide range of communications technologies and products 
including text-to-speech programmes, magnifiers, conversion amplifiers for 
hearing aids and mouse and keyboard alternatives.

The Department for Culture, Media and Sport supported the development of the 
communication section including ICT access, helping to “widen the product 
area and specifically work on including software products”, Mylles said.

The communications section of Living Made Easy now contains details of more 
than 250 software products with prices and specification, as well as listing 
relevant ICT organisations that can provide further advice and support, he 
said.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=965


+03: Standards developers urged to support older and disabled people

People working on technical standards for mainstream products and services 
must be more aware of the needs of older and disabled people, delegates at 
eAccess 13 heard in a closing session in speakers raised key points for the 
future of accessibility.

Gill Whitney, head of the Design for All Research Group at Middlesex 
University, said that in a recent survey of committee members by the British 
Standards Institution, only one third answered ‘yes’ to the question: “Do 
any of your standardisation activities involve the standardisation of 
products or services where the accessibility for older and disabled people 
needs to be considered?”

However, almost four-fifths of respondents (76.7%) had said yes to the 
question: “Do any of your standardisation activities involve the 
standardisation of products or services which are designed to be used by 
people?”

In an ageing society, these answers make no sense together, Whitney said, 
since all standards for people are also standards for older and disabled 
people. One development that might help is the current revision of the 
international standards creation guidance ISO/IEC Guide 71:2001, she said: 
guidelines for standards developers to address the needs of older persons 
and persons with disabilities.

“Embrace mobile first” was another key point presented by Jonathan Hassell, 
former head of accessibility at the BBC and founder of Hassell Inclusion.

“For me, the most natural place for somebody with any type of impairment to 
get a better experience of the world is through a mobile device. It’s the 
one thing they have with them all of the time, [that] they will depend on 
for absolutely everything,” Hassell said. “If you are not thinking about 
accessibility and mobile you’ve got it completely back to front.”

Mel Findlater, Director of The You Can Hub, made a similar point when she 
took to the stage dressed in a cardboard box. “As a society, we put people 
with disabilities in boxes all the time” Findlater said. “Technology, 
especially mobile technology, has real potential to help people with 
disabilities step out of their boxes. Can we start thinking in that way, 
co-design with people and help people step out of their boxes?”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=960


++News in Brief:

+04: Wiki Fix: A website has been launched to give web developers and other 
internet users the opportunity to write their own accessibility “fixes” for 
popular websites, to be stored for others to view and use. The creator of 
“Accessify Wiki”, Open University web developer Nick Freear, says the site 
is intended to complement existing accessibility efforts and guidelines, and 
give website owners assistance in improving accessibility. A range of tools 
to help people use the fixes will now be developed, and volunteers are 
sought to help with all aspects of the project:

Short link: http://bit.ly/1aTcTxz

Full link: http://accessify.wikia.com/wiki/Accessify_Wiki

+05: Divide Displayed: A visual information diagram or “infographic” 
visualising the UK’s digital divide reveals that 49% of disabled people and 
61% of those aged over 65 are still not online. The ‘Digital Nation?’ 
graphic has been produced by the Tinder Foundation, based on figures from 
official sources including communications regulator Ofcom and the Office for 
National Statistics. It shows the kinds of people who are more likely to use 
the internet and for what purpose, with visual representations of how 
factors such as age and socio-economic status affect user-activity:

Short link to infographic as PDF: http://bit.ly/18l5R4E

Full link to infographic as PDF: 
http://www.tinderfoundation.org/sites/default/files/research-publications/digital_nation_infographic.pdf

+06: Increasing Expertise: A new higher education qualification has been 
developed by Middlesex University for ICT professionals and others who want 
to improve their knowledge of accessible ICT design. The Post Graduate 
Certificate Professional Practice in Design for Diversity in ICT is a 
one-year course led by e-inclusion expert Gill Whitney, beginning in January 
2014:

Short link: http://bit.ly/17PySWd

Full link: 
http://www.mdx.ac.uk/courses/postgraduate/Professional-practice/Diversity_information_Communication_Technology.aspx


[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Captioning.

Bee Communications has joined the Ai-Media group and is now able to offer 
classroom, lecture, meeting or event captioning on the game-changing Ai-Live 
platform. Real-time captions are streamed to a web-enabled device, and a 
transcript can also be provided after each session. The system is optimised 
for tablet use, with significant improvements to dictionary and transcript 
functionality, enhanced security, and an accessible caption viewer including 
dyslexic fonts and optimised colour palettes.

Captioning helps people learn and interact by providing equality of access 
to live content. For more information, please contact:
beth.abbott@ai-live.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Two: Conference Report
- eAccess 13: Debate.

+07: The price of software freedom
By Dan Jellinek.

With some assistive technology software such as specialist text-to-speech 
screenreaders being relatively expensive to buy, moves have been underway 
for some time to widen the role that free and open source software can play 
in supporting the IT needs of people with disabilities.

However, while free software sounds like a great idea – and an even better 
price – its development is not always so straightforward, delegates heard at 
the recent eAccess 13 conference in London.

A discussion group chaired by University of Southampton internet research 
fellow EA Draffan focused on “the exciting expansion in the number of 
strategies involving free and open source software that can support access 
to technology”. It set out to examine “the robustness of this type of 
software; ongoing support and maintenance issues and whether this is a 
feasible route for government and other organisations to take in the long 
term.”

Free and open source software are notoriously hard to define, but in general 
terms, free software can mean both that which has no cost to the user, and 
software which people are free to adapt for their own ends. Open source 
software (which is sometimes, but not always, also free in either or both 
senses) is software whose source code is published so everyone can see it. 
There are various overlaps between these categories, and many varieties of 
copyright licence under which software can be distributed so as to remain 
“free”, but on the whole both free and open source software are either no 
cost or much lower cost to use than proprietary, specialist assistive 
software which only the developers or owners can sell or licence.

Free and open source software has advantages other than price: the ability 
for others to adapt it means, for example, that software produced in one 
language can be taken by another group and translated into another language. 
And its functionality can be tweaked to suit new groups of users by 
volunteer developer communities, often working together using online code 
exchange and development platforms, such as GitHub and SourceForge.

Sounds good, but the fact is there has been a surprisingly low level of free 
and open source software to emerge in the assistive technology arena, 
Draffan said. “There is lots of good free software in other sectors – what 
is stopping us in assistive technology?”

One of the main problems is funding, she said. Although developing software 
can be relatively affordable, open source software needs to have a community 
of users built around it to help maintain and strengthen the code, Draffan 
said. “You have to build your community, to blog, tweet – you have got to 
have your community stay with you. How do you do that? It is terribly time 
consuming, and without money, you can’t sustain it.

“The actual capital expense of developing something is 33% or even less of 
total cost. The real money goes on promotion and marketing.”

Some projects are supported by companies who allow their paid developers 
time to support voluntary open source projects. Google, for example, allows 
its engineers a certain percentage of their time to pursue creative projects 
such as writing open source software; and many other giant IT companies such 
as IBM support social projects.

For individual projects, however, support can still be a problem. And there 
are other barriers, too: free software licences sound simple but there are 
so many variations such as BSD and GNU that the field can be hard to 
understand, Draffan said. This matters: getting each licence exactly right 
to suit the aims of each project is “horrendously important”, she said.

Other issues include inevitable limitations to projects supported by 
volunteer communities: commercial tools, while they tend to be more 
expensive, often have access to better development funding and hence are 
generally more fully-featured and support more standard platforms, Draffan 
said. Open source software, on the other hand, often does part of a job very 
well, or supports one operating system or web browser well, but does not 
work so well across the board, she said.

But isn’t the world big enough for all kinds of software? Or, as Draffan put 
it, “Can we achieve a nirvana where we have a two-tier system?”

To do that, we need more encouragement for open innovation, she said. This 
could partly be achieved by promoting existing success stories, to fire 
people’s imaginations, and also by wider distribution of the free and open 
source assistive technology that already exists. “I give a pen drive with 
free assistive technology to new students – why is someone not doing it for 
people in care homes?”

The government may have a useful role to play here, and does support some 
open source software because it wants to avoid supplier lock-in and control, 
Draffan said. However, this support has so far mainly concentrated on 
well-established platforms and tools such as web content management 
software, she said, “whereas with assistive technology, we are asking for 
someone to create something new.”

One answer might be to look for software projects that have already been 
started but need support to reach the next level, she said. “We need to look 
for something already sitting there that is waiting to tip, that needs a bit 
of a nudge, so you can validate it, you can say here is what we think is the 
most promising one.”

The results will definitely be worth it, she said, in an ageing society. 
Some might think assistive technology is a small area of software 
development aimed at a small user community, she said, “but is it? If I am 
thinking of 25% of population that is getting old, it is not so small.”

NOTE: EA Draffan’s slides and other speaker slides and notes from eAccess 13 
are available to view online at:
http://www.headstar.com/eaccess13/agenda.html

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=958


[Section Two ends]


++Sponsored notice: Audio book mysteries to relax and enjoy

More and more people are using audio books to relax, and to develop and 
stimulate their imaginations. My name is Donna J. Jodhan and since 2010 I 
have been using my audio mysteries to help thousands from around the world 
to do just that – for pennies at a time.

I am an author who is blind. My audio mystery titles include ‘Birthday Party 
at the Beach’ [plot summary follows]: It was supposed to have been a happy 
occasion – yet one of the guests ended up being dead. She just got into the 
wrong things at the wrong time and before she knew it, it was too late to 
run. But why did Dr. Jan Bearstow have to die? [plot summary ends] Other 
titles include ‘The Million Dollar Mansion’, ‘The Kidnapper’s Kid’ and many 
more.
Visit www.donnajodhan.com to learn more, subscribe to my monthly newsletter 
or buy the audio mysteries direct at:
www.donnajodhan.com/store.html .

[Sponsored notice ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Associate Editor: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 163 ends.]
