++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 162, October 2013.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the 
end).


++Issue 162 Contents.

01: UK Ignoring British Sign Language Video Technology, Analyst Warns.
- Most firms and UK government departments misunderstand value, says 
entrepreneur

+02: Access to the Internet by Older People and Mobile Tips at Heart of 
e-Access 13.
- Mobile inclusion and care home technology projects lead the exemplary 
event

03: ‘3D Search Engine’ Tested by Blind Tokyo Schoolchildren.
- Futuristic trial creates tactile aids from live object data

News in Brief: 04: Digital benefits - guide to online benefits for older 
people; 05: Guiding Resource - sight loss support; 06: Leaders’ Vote - 
e-accessibility policy advisor up for award; 07: Visual Paralympics - 
graphic history of the games

Section Two: Web Accessibility
08: One Million Steps: Boosting Access Awareness, One Website at a Time.
Despite increased publicity around digital inclusion, online access and 
accessibility are still huge problems for millions in the UK, including many 
disabled and elderly people. Several years ago, expensive specialist 
equipment was often the only answer, but as AbilityNet’s Robin 
Christopherson reports, the growth of inclusive technology is providing 
invaluable new routes of access for many people.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: UK Ignoring British Sign Language Video Technology, Analyst Warns.

Most British companies and government departments are ignoring new ways of 
offering video links to British Sign Language (BSL) interpreters because 
they misunderstand the value of this to deaf customers, a leading 
practitioner has told E-Access Bulletin.

Jeff McWhinney, chair of social enterprise SignVideo ( 
http://www.signvideo.co.uk ), was speaking following the launch of a trial 
service by the broadcaster Sky, allowing deaf customers to contact the 
company’s customer services team using SignVideo interpreters based in 
London and Edinburgh.

The cloud-based service – run through Sky’s Accessibility website ( 
http://www.sky.com/accessibility ) – facilitates the call between a member 
of Sky’s Accessible Customer Services team and the company’s customers, who 
use their own webcam.

However, use of such services by major firms is all-too rare in the UK 
despite advances in technology, McWhinney said, due to basic 
misunderstandings about the need to offer them. “The technology has been 
around for some time now, but there are a lot of misunderstandings about 
sign language”, he said. “Most people think sign language is a visual form 
of English, but that is not the case: it is actually a different language. 
Its grammar and syntax are nothing like English. Sign language is actually 
closer to languages in India in terms of word order, for instance.”

That misunderstanding creates a lot of barriers because companies usually 
just say that deaf customers don’t need to sign, they can just send an 
email, McWhinney said. The problem is, the average deaf person has a low 
reading age, so in email exchanges there will be misunderstandings, he said. 
“But when deaf people are able to use sign video as first language, they can 
express themselves confidently.”

Sky is the only major broadcaster outside America to use this service, 
McWhinney said, though one or two other UK firms such as BT and Lloyds Bank 
have used it. “It is crucial for financial industry: in the past, deaf 
people had to ask their neighbours and friends to phone in for them, and you 
can imagine the security consequences of asking your neighbour to call the 
bank for you.”

Around 40 UK local authorities also use the service, he said, in a similar 
way to offering telephone language interpreter services to customers with 
other spoken languages such as Polish or Hindi. But no central government 
body is using SignVideo, McWhinney said, despite many such as HM Revenue & 
Customs being huge, customer-facing organisations.

“I have major frustrations with HMRC: they refuse to speak to me via a third 
party. On three occasions I have been fined £100 for not filing a tax return 
on time due to confusion over my password, and I couldn’t phone them, I had 
to write to them and of course this meant the deadline was passed. All three 
times I have had my fine refunded because it was obviously not my fault, but 
all this just adds more bureaucracy.”

McWhinney said Sky has a good track record with deaf people who use BSL, as 
one of the main funders for the BSL Broadcasting Trust which produces 
independent content presented in sign language for the Community Channel on 
Sky, Virgin Media, Freeview and BT Vision services.

NOTE: You can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=941


+02: Access to the Internet by Older People and Mobile Tips at Heart of 
e-Access 13.

Access to the internet in homes for the elderly and developing inclusive 
services on smartphones and tablet computers are among topics on the agenda 
at e-Access 13, the UK’s leading event on access to technology by people 
with disabilities.

Delegates will hear about the Connecting Care project, looking at how care 
homes for older people can make the most of new technology to support their 
organisation, carers and service users. The project is run by Lasa, a 
technology support group for charities and public sector bodies, with 
funding from the Department of Health.

Presenters of a mobile inclusion workshop include Shadi Abou-Zahra of the 
World Wide Web Consortium’s Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI).

Mobile platforms such as iOS, Android, and Windows are rapidly evolving with 
richer and more robust accessibility features and support, giving developers 
more ways to create accessible mobile web applications, Abou-Zahra will say. 
His workshop – co-presented with Jon Gibbins of Dotjay consulting – will 
cover the accessibility features available on the major mobile platforms and 
suggest strategies for integrating accessibility into mobile projects.

Elsewhere on the agenda, GB Paralympics star Hannah Cockroft MBE, winner of 
two gold medals at London 2012, will help explore the ‘Paralympics effect’, 
focusing on how increased public awareness of disability issues after the 
2012 Paralympic Games can be used to maximum benefit.

Minister for Culture, Communications and Creative industries Ed Vaizey will 
update delegates on how the government is addressing accessibility, and 
other speakers will cover a wide range of topics, including: user-testing of 
websites by people with disabilities; e-book accessibility; and how people 
can go about securing senior management support for digital inclusion 
strategies.

The event, hosted by E-Access Bulletin publishers Headstar in association 
with the One Voice for Accessible ICT Coalition, is held in central London 
on 31 October. For more information and to secure your place, visit:
http://www.headstar.com/eaccess13/

NOTE: You can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=944


+03: ‘3D Search Engine’ Tested by Blind Tokyo Schoolchildren.

A voice-activated machine combining web search engine technology with 3D 
printing is giving visually impaired school children in Tokyo the chance to 
experiment with what could be a glimpse into the future for the creation of 
live tactile teaching aids.

Called the ‘Hands On Search’, users speak the name of an object into the 
machine which then searches the internet for modelling data. The 3D printer 
then creates a miniature model of it, using materials such as plastic, 
carbon and metal. If the machine cannot find enough modelling data, a 
request for the data will be posted onto the Hands On Search public website.

Developed by Yahoo! Japan and Tokyo creative agency Hakuhodo Kettle, the 
Hands On Search device is currently on free loan to the Special Needs 
Education School for the Visually Impaired, a laboratory school of the 
University of Tsukuba.

The aim is to allow children who cannot search the internet conventionally 
an opportunity to experience the results of web searches through touch, as 
opposed to vision. A video by Yahoo! Japan shows the machine printing out 
small models of items whose names children have spoken into the machine, 
such as a giraffe, dinosaur and the Tokyo Skytree, a landmark building in 
the city.

Yahoo! Japan plan to donate Hands On Search to an organisation at the end of 
October, though it has not been decided who will receive it. There are 
currently no plans to make a commercial version of Hands On Search, the 
company has said.

NOTE: You can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=946


++News in Brief:

+04: Digital benefits: A guide detailing the benefits that the internet can 
offer to older people has been published online by price comparison service 
Choose.net. Using research from charity Age UK, the government, think-tanks 
and other organisations, the guide explores the benefits that going online 
can offer to older people, including financial management; independence; and 
reducing social isolation:

Short link: http://bit.ly/VZP7Nv

Full link: 
http://www.choose.net/media/guide/features/digital-inclusion-reasons-older-people.html

+05: Guiding Resource: A website has been launched by the Prevent Blindness 
America organisation aimed at helping people with sight loss in all aspects 
of their lives, ‘Living well with low vision’. The site includes a self-help 
guide for people experiencing low vision; links to and resources from more 
than 1,500 organisations, services and other websites; and a free online 
handbook to help people caring for someone with a visual impairment:

Short link: http://bit.ly/1d86x12

Full link: http://lowvision.preventblindness.org/

+06: Leaders’ Vote: Adrian Goodall, senior eAccessibility policy advisor at 
the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, has been nominated in the 
Digital Leaders 50 awards, which recognise innovation and achievement in the 
digital sector. Goodall – who has helped E-Access Bulletin publishers 
Headstar develop our eAccess conference over the years – is among several 
nominees linked with access to technology by people with disabilities. 
Others include Ed Vaizey MP, Minister for Culture, Communications and 
Creative Industries, in whose office Goodall works – nominated in the 
politicians category – and charity AbilityNet, nominated among 
non-governmental organisations. E-Access Bulletin readers are encouraged to 
vote for their favourites online:

Short link: http://bit.ly/1g1VYPx

Full link: http://www.digitalbydefaultnews.co.uk/digital-leaders-50/vote/

+07: Visual Paralympics: An “infographic” visual data chart tracing the 
history and evolution of the Paralympic Games from its beginnings in the 
nineteenth century up to the 2012 London Paralympics has been released by a 
US-based website aimed at people working in special needs education. 
‘Pathway to the Paralympics’ features historical facts and figures about the 
games, such as data on the growing number of female Paralympians and the 
identity of the most decorated athlete in the history of the games, who won 
55 medals, 41 of them gold. What is her name? Find out at:

Short link: http://bit.ly/1734khY

Full link: http://www.masters-in-special-education.com/paralympics/


[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Captioning.

Bee Communications has joined the Ai-Media group and is now able to offer 
classroom, lecture, meeting or event captioning on the game-changing Ai-Live 
platform. Real-time captions are streamed to a web-enabled device, and a 
transcript can also be provided after each session. The system is optimised 
for tablet use, with significant improvements to dictionary and transcript 
functionality, enhanced security, and an accessible caption viewer including 
dyslexic fonts and optimised colour palettes.

Captioning helps people learn and interact by providing equality of access 
to live content. For more information, please contact:
beth.abbott@ai-live.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Two: Opinion
- Web Accessibility

+08: One Million Steps: Boosting Access Awareness, One Website at a Time.
By Robin Christopherson

Recent research shows that the great majority of websites are still failing 
consistently to comply with even the lowest priority checkpoints of the 
accessibility guidelines set out by the international web standards body the 
World Wide Web Consortium. Despite a plethora of initiatives to raise 
awareness of this issue, from Citizens Online’s ‘Fix the Web’ campaign to 
Global Accessibility Awareness Day, the situation does not seem to be 
improving at a significant rate.

Little wonder, therefore, that one in six of us is still reluctant to 
venture into the online world and not surprising either that around half of 
those on the wrong side of the digital divide are disabled, and a similar 
number are aged 65 or over. The scope for mainstream technologies to 
transform the lives of this sizeable minority seems largely untapped.

It is ironic that in this divided digital economy, the UK public sector – 
both local and central government – is now heavily promoting the elusive 
‘channel shift’ – a switch from dealing with citizens by phone, post or 
face-to-face, to digital channels. This, we are told, is the holy grail of 
efficient modern public services.

But the truth is that in this same new digital world, some eight million UK 
citizens without full access to the online environment due to age, 
disability or economic situation could become progressively disenfranchised, 
economically, socially and even politically.

But there is a glimmer of hope. Just in time, it appears that technology has 
an emergent property – that of inclusivity. Mainstream devices are actually 
getting increasingly user-friendly for disabled and older people as design 
becomes more inclusive for all of us. And prices are dropping too as these 
products become more ubiquitous.

In the past, disabled people became accustomed to living in a ‘ghetto’ of 
specialist, bespoke products with prohibitive price tags that few could 
afford. But all of that specialist functionality and much, much more can now 
be supplied for a fraction of the cost by smartphones or tablets, using mass 
market applications and not expensively produced bespoke software. With the 
addition of inexpensive peripherals such as Bluetooth keyboards or switching 
devices, almost anyone’s needs can be served.

The trick is to know how to make the necessary adjustments in their 
operating systems and functions to make them more disability friendly and 
accommodate your own specific requirements.

AbilityNet’s contribution to solving this problem is “My Computer, My Way”, 
an online resource to which any website can link for free. It’s already 
embedded in various high profile sites such as Samsung, Barclays, Sky and 
NHS Choices, and now the charity has set itself the target of ensuring one 
million websites are linked to the tool.

Designed to help those who struggle at the digital interface (with a vision 
or hearing impairment, difficulties in operating keyboard and mouse; or 
simply reading and spelling), a link to My Computer My Way from a website’s 
accessibility page helps to equip users with the information they need to 
optimise their experience.

And you don’t have to be disabled to find this tool valuable. Have you tried 
to use your tablet device in strong sunlight? Wouldn’t it be easier to see 
what’s on the screen if you knew how to adjust the brightness?

It explains the accessibility features of many operating systems across a 
wide range of devices including Mac and PC desktops, tablets and 
smartphones. It now includes details of current desktop versions of Windows 
and Mac OS X, as well as newly launched versions of Android and iOS. The 
next version is due out by Christmas 2013 to explain what’s new in Android 
4.3 Jellybean and iOS7.

Not only does this mean that end-users will be able to navigate online 
content more effectively, it also increases the legal compliance of any site 
as it shows a real commitment to accessibility and digital inclusion.

At AbilityNet we believe that communicating simple messages about 
accessibility is the most effective way to raise awareness and behaviour. It’s 
a slow process, but an incremental one, and we remain hopeful that 
significant progress can be made.

NOTE: Robin Christopherson is Head of Digital Inclusion at AbilityNet.

You can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=948

[Section Two ends]


++Sponsored notice: Audio book mysteries to relax and enjoy.

More and more people are using audio books to relax, and to develop and 
stimulate their imaginations. My name is Donna J. Jodhan and since 2010 I 
have been using my audio mysteries to help thousands from around the world 
to do just that – for pennies at a time.

I am an author who is blind. My audio mystery titles include ‘Birthday Party 
at the Beach’ [plot summary follows]: It was supposed to have been a happy 
occasion – yet one of the guests ended up being dead. She just got into the 
wrong things at the wrong time and before she knew it, it was too late to 
run. But why did Dr. Jan Bearstow have to die? [plot summary ends] Other 
titles include ‘The Million Dollar Mansion’, ‘The Kidnapper’s Kid’ and many 
more.
Visit www.donnajodhan.com to learn more, subscribe to my monthly newsletter 
or buy the audio mysteries direct at:
www.donnajodhan.com/store.html .

[Sponsored notice ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 162 ends.] 
