++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 161, September 2013.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others so they can
subscribe: Full details at the end.


++Issue 161 Contents.

01: Top e-book reader firms contest US accessibility law.
- Changes required would be too costly, they argue.

02: Accessibility now thriving in mainstream mobile market, campaigner says
- Business case becoming clearer to manufacturers.

03: Paralympics star is e-Access conference keynote speaker
Gold medal winner Hannah Cockroft to speak at technology access event.

News in Brief: 04: Digital friends - free ‘e-Befriending’ service for people 
with sight loss; 05: Shorter name - consumer research charity Ricability 
renamed Rica; 06: Care shortfall - only a fifth of care homes offer internet 
access.


Section Two: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.
07: Debate Continues - University of York academics explain web 
accessibility research; 08: Busy BBC - corporation’s website too crowded?

Section Three: Global view
09: A long and arduous journey: the fight for equality in Canada and 
worldwide.
Canadian citizen Donna Jodhan talks about her ongoing quest to increase 
website accessibility for blind people in her country, including her 
dramatic five-year legal battle with the Canadian Government.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Top e-book reader firms contest US accessibility law.

Three of the biggest e-book reader manufacturers – Amazon, Kobo and Sony – 
have petitioned the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to ask for 
exemptions from US laws requiring products to be accessible to users with 
disabilities.

The three are urging the commission to waive parts of the 21st Century Video 
and Communications and Video Accessibility Act which require any product 
offering ‘advanced communication services’ (ACS) to be “accessible to and 
usable by individuals with disabilities.” The manufacturers say that as 
e-readers are used almost exclusively for reading, they do not provide more 
generic ACS. They argue that to make them fully accessible would increase 
their cost and weight and decrease battery life, essentially turning them 
into different devices more similar to tablet computers.

“Individuals with disabilities have better ACS options on devices other than 
e-readers” the petition says. It also states that if accessibility functions 
were added to the e-readers, these changes “would not yield a meaningful 
benefit to individuals with disabilities”.

However Steve Tyler, head of solutions, strategy and planning at the Royal 
National Institute of Blind People in the UK, told E-Access Bulletin that 
e-readers should be made accessible to all, since they are “game-changing 
technologies” for blind and partially sighted people. “Tenuous arguments 
around an increase in weight or low battery life of devices are simply not 
justified nor representative of the truth around the state of play in the 
technology market today”, Tyler said.

“Rendering these devices fully accessible through synthetic speech, as well 
as options around font size and contrast, is a business decision rather than 
one based on technology,” he said.

The coalition of e-reader manufacturers’ petition is available as a PDF at 
the following link: http://bit.ly/16gW53i .

Public comments on the petition were invited by the FCC last month, the 
overwhelming majority of which opposed the coalition’s waiver request. More 
than 500 comments were sent in all, viewable at: http://bit.ly/16wWHEo

The commission will now consider the submissions before reaching its 
decision on whether or not to accept a waiver. At the time of writing, no 
date had been set for this decision.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=919


+02: Accessibility now thriving in mainstream mobile market, campaigner says

Accessibility functions on mobile devices are becoming mainstream and mobile 
manufacturers are now competing to make their devices more accessible, the 
president of international digital accessibility body G3ict has said.

Speaking at the M-Enabling Australasia 2013 event in Australia, Axel Leblois 
said accessibility has become a driving force in the mobile market.

“For the first time in my entire life in the industry, I see that major 
vendors are competing for accessibility. That is because everyone, every 
day, who uses a smartphone, living with a disability or not, is going to 
encounter an instant of disability”, Leblois said.

He said anyone might encounter a temporary impairment when using their 
mobile device, such as not being able to see the screen in some situations 
or relying on writing and reading text when the user cannot make phone 
calls.

“Those [accessibility] features – so important for people with 
disabilities – are essential for most users today. That’s why you see such 
competition and why you see iOS and Windows competing for the best 
accessibility features”, Leblois said.

Businesses are also increasingly seeing the business case for making their 
digital products accessible, he said. “Why would a microwave oven not have 
voice controls, since it will be so cheap, because it’s becoming digitised 
in the mobile industry?” he said. “[Accessibility] has a profound effect on 
everything.”

Transcripts and presentations from M-Enabling 2013 – organised by the 
Australian Communications Consumer Network – can be found below:

Short link:
http://bit.ly/19HShhI

Full link:
http://accan.org.au/index.php/news-centre/news/69-accan-news/629-m-enabling-australasia-presentations-and-transcripts

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=922


+03: Paralympics star is this year’s e-Access conference keynote speaker.

GB Paralympics star Hannah Cockroft MBE, winner of two gold medals at the 
London 2012 Paralympic Games in wheelchair sprint races, is this year’s 
inspirational keynote speaker at e-Access ‘13, the UK’s leading event on 
access to technology by people with disabilities.

The event will analyse the ‘Paralympics effect’, focusing on how increased 
public and media interest in disability after the 2012 Paralympic Games can 
be used to maximum benefit for accessibility progress. Other speakers 
include Minister for Culture, Communications and Creative industries Ed 
Vaizey, who will update delegates on how the government is addressing 
accessibility; and disability consultant and campaigner Simon Stevens, star 
of a Channel Four TV comedy show.

Elsewhere on the agenda, topics include user-testing by people with 
disabilities; access to mobile technologies including smartphones, tablets 
and apps; e-book accessibility; achieving management support for digital 
inclusion strategies; accessible open source technologies; and accessibility 
of ‘PDF’ files.

The event, hosted by E-Access Bulletin publishers Headstar in association 
with the One Voice for Accessible ICT Coalition, is to be held in central 
London on 31 October. For the ninth year running, it brings together users, 
practitioners, suppliers and academics from across the field to discuss how 
technology can be used by and benefit people of all ages and abilities.

For more information and to register, visit:
http://www.headstar.com/eaccess13/

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=924


++News in Brief:

+04: Digital friends: A free ‘e-Befriending’ service is allowing people with 
sight loss the opportunity to connect with supportive volunteers using 
email, reducing the risk of social isolation. The service is also aiming at 
improving people’s IT skills – anybody wanting to use the service but 
worried about their computer skills will be helped by the organisers, the 
Thomas Pocklington Trust. Those wishing to volunteer for the service and 
help others can also find out more at the link below:

Short link: http://bit.ly/13AP8hm

Full link: 
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk/supportservices/befriending/ebefriending

+05: Shorter name: Ricability, a national research charity providing 
information of value to disabled and older consumers, has been renamed Rica 
(the Research Institute for Consumer Affairs). Features available on the 
charity’s relaunched website include past research and testing into 
accessibility of digital TV and radio sets (see ‘research reports’ in the 
‘Research and consultancy’ section).

Full link: http://www.rica.org.uk/

+06: Care shortfall: Only one-fifth of the UK’s 20,000 care homes provide 
internet access to residents, according to new research from carehome.co.uk. 
The independent information website is now calling for more care homes to 
offer internet access with a view to preventing older residents and 
residents with disabilities becoming isolated and helping them with online 
shopping and communicating with friends and family.

Short link: http://bit.ly/1614upl

Full link: 
http://www.carehome.co.uk/news/article.cfm/id/1560819/plea-to-get-residents-online-as-research-reveals-thousands-are-missing-out-on-crucial-internet-access

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Debate Continues: University of York academics have responded in detail 
to reader questions following an E-Access Bulletin report on research into 
user-based accessibility and the international Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines (WCAG). Andre Freire, Helen Petrie and Chris Power – authors of 
the research and PhD student/teaching staff at the University of York’s 
Department of Computer Science – have responded to individual comments and 
points on the E-Access Bulletin blog, posted below our original article.

You can read all their responses in full and continue the debate at the 
following link:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=873


+08: Busy BBC: Our regular correspondent Brian Gaff, from the Kingston upon 
Thames Association for the Blind, writes in following last issue’s piece on 
the new guidelines for mobile accessibility issued by the BBC.

“I do applaud the BBC trying to do something about mobile access”, Brian 
writes. “I would however take issue with the BBC claim that their web site 
is accessible. Well, it is in the sense that most of its clever bits do work 
for screenreader users, but to me, rather like Amazon and others, they are a 
perfect demonstration on how to pass the accessibility criteria while making 
it hard to use.

“It is far, far too busy on each page. All the time you have to click to 
read the rest of items of news, or go there to look at this similar item 
etc, and it is just really hard sometimes to actually stay reading what you 
want to read without distractions.

“To me it’s what happens when the nuts and bolts are all correct, but the 
design is a real pig. I know I’m not alone in thinking this, but 
unfortunately when folk complain (assuming they can find the right form to 
do it on), they get ignored or the answer comes weeks later on and is just 
an excuse about why it is as it is. Let us hope the content writers and 
authors looking at mobile access guidelines do not have the same ‘more is 
better’ approach.”

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Remote Captioning.

Remote Captioning enables deaf people to participate with confidence in 
meetings, lectures and conference calls. It delivers accurate and fast 
captions of everything that is said to a website for a deaf person to read. 
Costing just £65 per hour, and with same day booking, it means deaf people 
can have the communication support they need, on the go and on demand. All 
that is needed to use the service is access to the internet, and it can be 
accessed on a smart phone or tablet.

For details visit:
http://bee-communications.com/remote-captioning.htm

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


Section Three: Global view

+09: A long and arduous journey: the fight for equality in Canada and 
worldwide
by Donna Jodhan.

In 2000 I embarked on a journey to encourage the Canadian Government to work 
with blind Canadians to make their websites more accessible to all 
Canadians. At that time, my main objective was to raise awareness of the 
inaccessibility of government websites, and to convince officials of the 
importance of making their websites fully accessible as soon as possible.

I started my mission by taking my concerns to various departmental heads 
within the government and my presentations focused on the importance of 
making information fully accessible to all Canadians. I focused specifically 
on the fact that we are now living in an information society and a 
knowledge-based economy and blind Canadians, like everyone else, needed 
immediate access to information to make vital everyday decisions that 
affected such things as our health, safety, security and social welfare.

By making websites more accessible they could enable blind Canadians to 
read, download and to respond to information independently and without 
sighted assistance, thus protecting their right to privacy and 
confidentiality. To this end, I told the civil servants they needed to give 
their website developers the tools to make website content accessible and 
readable to blind persons, to produce files in alternate formats, and to 
provide training to support staff to be of assistance to blind Canadians. I 
also told them about the benefits to all Canadians if websites were to be 
made fully accessible.

Where could they find the necessary expertise to accomplish all this? 
Through the advice and assistance of blind testers and users along with 
guidance from accessibility experts, both nationally and internationally.

By 2004, however, I was struggling to make much headway, and I had come to 
the conclusion that to have any effect on the Canadian Government, my 
one-person mission would have to be expanded to include support from other 
blind Canadians, as well as from organisations of and for blind people. My 
challenge was not just inaccessible websites, but a deep-seated attitude 
that did not understand why blind Canadians needed to have equal access to 
information.

Eventually, this mission turned into a legal battle, triggered in particular 
after Statistics Canada refused to consider my job application on an equal 
footing to mainstream applicants, citing among its reasons that it was going 
to be too costly to produce exams in Braille or in an electronic format.

The legal battle began in full in 2007 after I had consulted with David 
Baker and his team at disability and human rights specialist lawyers 
Bakerlaw, and with Jutta Treviranus, a leading international accessibility 
expert and director of the Inclusive Design Research Centre at OCAD [Ontario 
College of Art and Design] University in Toronto.  I was extremely fortunate 
to have obtained funding under a Court Challenges Program just before 
funding to it was cut in July 2007. The basis for my case was a violation of 
my rights under the Canadian Charter of Rights; unequal access to 
information.

For the next five years, my lawyers and I, along with our accessibility 
experts, battled doggedly to keep our case alive as the government battled 
just as determinedly to have it thrown out of court. I received support from 
thousands of Canadians, both blind and sighted, and from individuals and 
organisations around the world. An online petition was launched by the 
Alliance for Equality of Blind Canadians and we gathered more than 500 
signatures. Press coverage extended from Canada to the US and well beyond, 
including TV, radio, newspaper and internet coverage.

In 2010 I won a landmark victory, as the lower Federal Court ruled in my 
favour, stating that the Canadian Government had indeed violated my rights 
under the Canadian Charter of Rights. The government appealed but lost round 
two of the battle in 2012 when the Canadian Court of Appeal again ruled in 
my favour; three judges having handed down a unanimous decision.

That was the end of that episode of my story, but since then, matters have 
moved on even further.

The Canadian Government has been mandated to make all of their websites 
fully accessible but no time limit has been put on them to do this. A few 
weeks ago the Alliance for Equality of Blind Canadians received an 
invitation from the government to have its members test their websites and I 
believe that this is a step in the right direction.

Many have asked why I embarked on such a long and arduous journey, and my 
response is that I did it for all blind Canadians, but especially for blind 
kids, as I truly believe I am obliged to make their future a better one than 
mine. I owe a debt of gratitude to everyone who has helped and supported me, 
with special mention to the Alliance for Equality of Blind Canadians, of 
which I was the president from 2011-13.

Finally, it is my hope that this project will remain a continual work in 
progress: so thanks too to everyone who has yet to join in but might read 
this and work out how to help in future.

NOTE: Donna Jodhan’s blog, Advocating Accessibility for All, is at:
http://donnajodhan.blogspot.co.uk/ .
And you can follow past coverage of her legal battle in E-Access Bulletin 
at: http://bit.ly/14VnOdU .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=932

[Section Three ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination for 
accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has helped hundreds 
of people improve their websites, with members offering friendly, no 
nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to 
guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility, want to 
help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to browse the 
archives, head over to:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2013 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 161 ends.]
