+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 64, APRIL 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 64 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: A Quarter of Council Sites Make False Accessibility Claims
- discrepancies could undermine trust in standards.

02: Commercial Sites Lack Guidance on Accessibility
- the latest UK research results.

03: Kurzweil Predicts Accessible Future
- low-cost pervasive technology is the key.

04: US Supermarket tests Robotic Guide
- the future of shopping?

News in Brief: 05: Strain Solution -  workplace guidance; 06: Talks
Two - mobile update; 07: Arabic Honours - student success.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Device Advice - age concern; 09: Research Request - users needed;
10: Statement Views - bank update; 11: Braille Dispute - teaching aid;
12: Musical Access -  translator search; 13: Tactile Tactics - accessible
space.

Section Three: Focus - Vision 2005
14: Accessible Technology is Not Science Fiction: exciting new work
is being done to exploit technologies that are already with us. Derek
Parkinson reports from Vision 2005.

Section Four: Research - Web Accessibility
15: Claims and Counter-Claims: The RNIB's expert testers found that
no local authority web site reached higher than level 'A' accessibility.
So why do some claim 'AA' and 'AAA' status? Dan Jellinek reports.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: A Quarter of Council Sites Make False Accessibility Claims.

Almost a quarter of UK council web sites are making false claims
about how well they measure up to Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG) set out by the World Wide Web Consortium
(http://www.w3.org/WAI), E-Access Bulletin has discovered.

Research into the accessibility of council sites by the Royal National
Institute of the Blind, published last month by the local government
Society of IT Management, found that of the 468 UK council web
sites, just 62 met level 'A' standards, and none achieved higher levels.
WCAG specifies three levels of compliance: 'A', 'AA' and 'AAA'.

However, research by E-Access Bulletin into a sample of 68 sites on
24 March 2005 found widespread claims of 'A', 'AA' and 'AAA'
accessibility, by the display of official WCAG logos on the sites,
contradicting what the RNIB's expert testers had found.

Nine councils in the sample claimed 'AAA' accessibility for part or all
of their sites at the time of testing, even though the RNIB found that
seven of these sites did not even reach single 'A' accessibility, and the
other two were are only single 'A' sites. A further three claimed 'AA'
where RNIB found them to not even meet 'A', and six claimed 'A'
status where only two were entitled to do so - a total of 16 false claims
in the sample, or 23.5 per cent.

Donna Smillie, who heads the RNIB's web accessibility team, said:
"The biggest problem is that it devalues the logos - if a site is claiming
a certain level people won't trust it, because more often than not they
don't comply." She said one possible reason for the discrepancies
could be that councils are simply running automated checks for
accessibility, when additional manual checks are needed to ensure a
site qualifies.

NOTE: Full story in Section Four, this issue.


+02: Commercial Sites Lack Guidance On Accessibility.

E-commerce web sites carry little useful guidance about the level of
accessibility they provide, according to an independent survey of the
web sites of 500 top retail and financial services companies providing
services to the UK.

Less than 10 per cent of the companies surveyed made any
commitment to achieving standards set down in the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (http://fastlink.headstar.com/wcag1), either by
displaying a logo, or a written statement on their web sites, researchers
from City University found. Of 250 retailers, just 10 web sites, or 4 per
cent of the total, claimed to fulfill the requirements of WCAG, the
internationally recognised benchmark of accessibility. From the
financial services sector, 27 web sites, or 10.8 per cent did so.

But after running tests on a random sample of pages using the
automated Watchfire Bobby tool
(http://bobby.watchfire.com/bobby/html/en/index.jsp), the researchers
found that most companies either overstated or made confusing claims
about the standards achieved by their sites.

Of the 10 retail sites tested, the Thameslink and Waitrose web sites
claimed to be 'AA' throughout, but were found to reach just the 'A'
standard the first level of accessibility, by the City University team.

Others were more ambiguous, with National Express claiming 'AAA'
compliance "where possible", while Music Corner has a web page on
accessibility that is claimed to reach 'AAA', although no specific
commitments are made for the rest of the site. Neither National
Express and Music Corner reached even 'A' according to City
University. Only Marks & Spencer and JD Sports were broadly
accurate in claiming 'A' compliance, according to the research.

Financial services companies faired no better. Of 10 sites claiming to
comply with WCAG and tested with Bobby, just Standard Life and
Royal Bank of Scotland achieved 'A' requirements, the rest failing to
reach even this level.


+03: Kurzweil Predicts Accessible Future.

By 2020, technology will eliminate many of the barriers associated
with sensory and physical disabilities, assistive technology pioneer Ray
Kurzweil told delegates at Vision 2005, the international conference
hosted by RNIB (http://fastlink.headstar.com/rnib6).

Computers as we know them will have changed beyond recognition by
2010, integrated into everyday objects such as clothing, he said.
Instead of sitting at a computer, they will be our constant companions,
feeding us the information we need in the way we choose. For vision-
impaired people this could mean a whispered commentary, Kurweil
told delegates.

The cost of hardware and software will decrease by around 50 per cent
per year, making these technologies widely available, not just
playthings of the rich, he said. He was keen to emphasise that this need
not be a threat.

A pioneer of flat bed scanners, optical character recognition (OCR)
reading technology and text-to-speech voice synthesisers, Kurzweil
demonstrated his latest work, software that can translate human voice
in one language to text, then text and voice output in a different
language within seconds.

Showing a flair for showmanship, Kurzweil was not physically present
at the event, delivering his presentation as a 3-D image at the speakers
podium.

NOTE: For further reporting from Vision 2005, see Section Three, this
issue.


+04: US Supermarket Chain tests Robotic Guide.

A prototype robotic guide has been developed in the US that allows
vision impaired people to find their way in airports and locate products
in supermarkets completely unaided.

The Robotic Guide uses a Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
reader to locate objects attached to RFID tags; small disks containing
information on an object, which can be attached to supermarket shelves
or items. To avoid collisions, the device has a built-in "laser range
finder" which detects objects up to 8 metres and 180 degrees in front of
the user.

"It's intended for airports and grocery stores where a guide dog is not
going to be much help; a guide dog can't recognise different brands of
toothpaste," said project team leader professor Vladimir Kulyukin from
the department of computer science at Utah State University
(http://www.cs.usu.edu/). "It is not a replacement guide dog,"
Kulyukin said.

The prototype, the size of an upright vacuum cleaner, has been
deployed in Lee's Marketplace (http://www.leesmarketplace.com/), a
local Utah supermarket and is being tested by seven vision-impaired
users.

To find a particular supermarket item, users type a serial number into a
Braille keyboard attached to the back of the robot. When a brand is
located, the device sends an audible signal to the user. However,
Kulyukin said since many vision-impaired people do not read Braille,
other formats may be investigated.

"If we're successful, then in [around] two years some grocery stores
will have the device," Kulyukin said. Negotiations are currently
underway on deployment of the device with a US supermarket chain
and one airport. If deployed at airports, users could call the device and
ask it to find them on arriving at an airport.

The robot guide costs 14 to 15,000 dollars but the price could be
halved if it was produced on a large scale Kulyukin said.

"This robotic guide can give me more independence, for example, with
shopping and the ability to find different offices within a business
building without a sighted person's assistance," said one vision-
impaired guide-tester.

"In order to get this robotic guide perfected, we need the help of big
shopping chains, for example Walmart, or airports to give us the
opportunity to test it out in different environments, he said."


++News in Brief:

+05: Strain Solution: A CD that advises on how to avoid stress, back,
wrist or eye strain due to bad workstation habits has been launched. It
suggests cheap or free hardware and software to prevent and manage
computer-related injuries. Aimed at staff and managers, 'The very best
CD of office sense' from AbilityNet, costs just under 20 pounds and
can be ordered by calling 01905 420520:
http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/content/abilitynet/products/office.htm .

+06: Talks Two: The second version of the screen reader for mobile
phones, SpeechPAK TALKS has been released offering access to
wireless application protocol (WAP) and web pages on Symbian series
60 and 80 phones for the first time. The software, which also offers
Wayfinder's GPS navigation has been launched by ScanSoft:
www.scansoft.com/speechpak/talks/.

+07: Arabic Honours: The first batch of students on a course teaching
Windows, Office, the internet and touch-typing to vision-impaired
students in the United Arab Emirates has graduated. The three-month
course was designed by the IT Education Project in collaboration with
Tamkeen, a Dubaian vocational training centre for the vision-impaired.
An Arabic and English portal has gone live to coincide with the event:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/uae .

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: E-Government for All: Planning for Accessibility
- 25 May, Urbis Conference Centre, Manchester
http://www.electronic-government.com/accessibility .

With the Disability Discrimination Act in full force there is a legal as
well as a moral imperative for all e-government services to be
accessible to all users. E-Access Bulletin and its sister publication
E-Government Bulletin present a one-day seminar on accessibility
of e-government services. Experts in the field will provide guidance
on creating accessible and usable e-government
services that need not be costly or difficult to produce.

Speakers include Shuna Kennedy, Chief executive, AbilityNet; Jenny
Van Tinteren, Head of Accessibility Solutions, Job Centre Plus; Paul
Blenkhorn, Professor of Assistive Technology, University of
Manchester; and Jackie Driver, Service Improvement and Inclusion
Team, Manchester City Council.

Places cost 295 pounds plus VAT for public, charitable and voluntary
sector and 395 plus VAT for private sector delegates. Additional
delegates booking at the same time receive a 100 pound discount.
For more information and to register, see:
http://www.electronic-government.com/accessibility .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Device Advice: Alan P. Magson, IT Project Coordinator at Age
Concern Bradford and District in Yorkshire writes: "I run a project at
Age Concern Bradford and District to teach the internet and email to
the over-50s in our area. I have recently come across at 93 year-old
lady who would like to learn what we are offering but has very poor
eyesight. Our local Social Services department has a scheme to enable
partially sighted people to learn computers, and they have lots of
specialist equipment but the terms of their funding restrict the scheme
to 18 to 64 year-olds.

"I have some Dolphin demonstration equipment with which I could
test the lady's ability, but thereafter, apart from Windows own
Accessibility features I have no other way of catering for her. Can you
advise please regarding any other means which might be available to
assist? Thank you."[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]

+09: Research Request: "I am currently studying for a Masters degree
in Internet Systems Development, and have chosen the area of web site
accessibility as the subject for my dissertation. I have developed a
simple tool that enables users to change the appearance of a web page
by clicking a link, but would be very interested in some of the
difficulties that people with visual impairments experience when using
the internet.

"I would like to get some feedback on what I have produced already to
develop the tool further. It can be accessed via the following link:
http://www.adsandtaz.com/dynamiccss/csstest.aspx . Clicking on the
links in the top-right corner of the screen will alter the appearance of
the page, without changing any of the page's content.

"There are certainly areas that could be improved and I would
welcome any comments on how this could be achieved. I look forward
to hearing from you." Please email adam@adsandtaz.com if you are
able to help Adam.

+10: Statement Views: The debate on accessible bank statements
continues and following Sam Latif's comments in March's Inbox,
asking for peoples' thoughts on service providers for the blind who
send paper invoices. Sam said " I did contact RNIB to tell them that
they provided inaccessible invoicing. They thanked me for making
them aware and said they will have a solution in six months' time."
However, Brian Williams has written: "I have been receiving Braille
invoices from RNIB for some years now." [Further responses to
inbox@headstar.com please]

Dan Thompson from Worcester in the UK contributes to the debate: "I
use NatWest Bank in the UK, and though I'm not aware of other
formats, I find their large print statements extremely good. They,
unlike some other banks I have used, have thought about this and come
up with a nice, clear print in adequate size, about 18pt and a good
contrast font.

I also use online banking, which I have found to be very good as well,
with clear layout and information, though I haven't tried this yet with a
screen reader, as I mainly use ZoomText magnifier. I'll have to let Jaws
loose on it shortly to see how it goes! Hope this is of some interest to
readers." [Please email comments to inbox@headstar.com]

+11: Braille Dispute: Ellen Miros from Michigan writes: "I am a
special education teacher with a third grade student that is blind. She is
currently using the Perkins Brailler for all writing that is not
transcribed to her para-educator. I am currently having a disagreement
with the VI consultant and would like to move her to an electronic
Brailler. Apparently in Michigan, it is the custom not to do this prior to
fifth grade.

Ellen would like to know if any readers have any articles on research
regarding when she can implement an electronic Brailler for her
student? "Thanks for any help you can give!" says Ellen. [Responses
please to inbox@headstar.com]

+12: Musical Access: The Inbox has received a request from Marta
Gil, manager of the SACI Network Network, an organisation that deals
with information and communication about disability which is based at
the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil.

"The Director of the Music Department put a request to us: a blind
student has enrolled and she needs software that can translate print
musical score to Braille, so she can read them," Marta says.

"We do not have such a software in our language, Portuguese, but she
understands English as well as the professors. So we would like to be
directed to such software, sites or other contacts." [Please email
responses to: inbox@headstar.com]

+13: Tactile Tactics: Allen Hoffman from the Section 508 project at
the US Internal Revenue Service writes: "After reading much about
systems that offer audible and tactual mapping combinations, I sent an
email to the company that manufactures the Leap Frog line of
products, which function as follows:  Printed pages with special ink are
placed on a plastic surface, when the pages are touched with a special
connected pen, the coordinates trigger the unit to set particular
variables, or emit specific audio content, for example.

"The software is loaded on the little unit on a ROM in a little plastic
holder like Nintendo Game Boy games. One can play a game with the
map of the United States to find States in so many seconds, or get the
distance between 2 points, for example.  If those pages were raised as
well as printed, then visually impaired folks could have a tremendous
cheap system to obtain spatial data from, for example, leave spatial
representations to the tactual graphics, and textual data to the audio. I
received this in response to my enquiry to the company however:
"LeapFrog has pursued this concept in the past without much
success. At this time we are not seeking development partnerships for
products developed for the blind." [further responses to
inbox@headstar.com]

[Section two ends]


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three - Conference Report
- Vision 2005

+14: Accessibility Is Not Science Fiction.
by Derek Parkinson

When thinking about how technology can improve our lives it's easy to
stray into the realms of science fiction, conjuring up a wish-list of
devices that would be so useful, if only they existed. And were
affordable, accessible, and properly supported of course.

One of the striking impressions from the Vision 2005 conference
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/rnib6) was how much more we should be
getting out of the technology that is already available, but that
achieving this needs much more than just technical research. When
problems accessibility problems arise, awareness and commitment are
often the culprits, rather than the technology itself.

In a session on employment, Ruth Loebl of the RNIB identified IT
support in the workplace as a potential barrier for vision impaired
people seeking work. This can be because the services are difficult to
access, requiring use of a mouse for example, or because staff may not
know how to install or maintain assistive equipment. The situation is
further complicated by the trend for large organisations to outsource
their IT infrastructure and support services, while small organisations
may be wary of investing in the equipment and expertise needed.

"We have to be realistic about small companies. We argue that they
should balance the cost of coping with a disability - when a member of
staff's vision worsens, for example - against the cost of recruiting and
training new personnel," said Loebl. "But that argument gets weaker,
the smaller the company," she said.

Anti-discrimination law could be one of the most effective way to
change attitudes, delegates heard. "In the US, we've seen the effects of
[the anti-discrimination law] Section 508. There has been a trickle-
down effect, so although it only covers the public sector its influence
has spread more widely," said Loebl. Suppliers to the public sector are
forced to invest in accessibility, but they then use it as a way of
competing for private sector business, she said.

The UK may be about to experience a similar effect, with legislation
being drawn up that would require the public sector to take a more
active role in promoting equality of opportunity, particularly among
disadvantaged groups. This will make accessibility a higher priority for
procurement decisions, said Loebl.

Impressive research efforts are going into direction-finding services,
and many people will have heard about the new PDAs available with
satellite technology, but Vision 2005 also revealed how much
interesting work is being done on ground-based wireless technologies.
For example, a team from the Polish university of Podlasie
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/podlasie) demonstrated a prototype that
uses standard mobile phone technology to give location and direction
information.

The system requires infrared transmitters and receivers to be embedded
in fixed objects at a location, and a standard internet-enabled mobile
phone. The phone collects information about the identity and direction
of the nearest object and sends it via the internet to a server which
computes the best route to a destination. An appealing aspect of this
approach is that infrared, Bluetooth, and internet connectivity are
mainstream technologies for mobile phones on sale today.

Delegates also learned of efforts in Japan to integrate data from a wide
range of wireless sources, including satellites, radio, infrared, and
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) devices, to deliver directions to
pedestrians. The four year Barrier-Free IT project, funded by the
Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, aims to build these
capabilities into a small attachment that is compatible with standard
mobile phones.

Making better use of existing technology was also a strong theme in
sessions dedicated to  accessible web design. Professor Helen Petrie of
City University (http://hcid.soi.city.ac.uk/index.html) ran over the main
points of her research into web site accessibility for the UK Disability
Rights Commission. From a sample of 1,000 web sites in five sectors
Petrie found that only 19 per cent achieved the most basic requirement
set down in Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/wcag1), the internationally recognised
benchmark of accessibility. Partially sighted people were only able to
achieve 76 per cent of basic tasks on the sites, while blind people could
only complete 53 per cent of tasks.

Delegates also heard about Petrie's plans for future research that will
shed new light on accessibility problems with web sites, with further
investigation into the tasks that vision impaired people find difficult,
and how these compare with problems experienced by sighted users.

A major problem with web site accessibility is the gulf between the
clinical reality that determines what users can do, and the technical
reality of web site design, Jim Tobias of Inclusive Design told
delegates. "Let's face it, many web sites are designed by 25 year-olds
who weigh 180 pounds and are as strong as a horse," he said. There are
an increasing number of tools available that can simulate vision
problems, enabling designers to build accessibility into a web site from
an early stage in the building process, he said.

The challenge, he said, is not so much the technology, but in raising
awareness and encouraging people to use it. "We must take this to the
designers, they won't come to us," he said.


[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four - Research
- Web Accessibility

+12: Claims and Counter-Claims
by Dan Jellinek

There are widespread and major discrepancies between levels of
accessibility claimed for themselves by local government web sites and
their actual levels of accessibility, research by E-Access Bulletin has
found.

Accessibility of sites to people with disabilities is usually measured
against the international standards set out by the World Wide Web
Consortium (http://www.w3.org/WAI). Their Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) specify three levels of compliance:
'A', 'AA' and 'AAA'.

Research into the accessibility of council sites by the Royal National
Institute of the Blind, published last month by the local government
Society of IT Management as part of their annual 'Better Connected'
review of sites, found that of the 468 UK council web sites, just 62 met
level 'A' standards, and none achieved higher levels.

However, research by E-Access Bulletin into a sample of 68 sites on
24 March 2005 found widespread claims of 'A', 'AA' and 'AAA'
accessibility, by the display of official WCAG logos on the sites, in
direct contradiction of what the RNIB's expert testers had found.

The sample of sites was selected to include all 38 sites classified as
'Transactional' in the Socitm research - the highest overall accolade
awarded to council sites - plus a further 30 sites selected at random. Of
the 68 sites examined, just 10 were found by the RNIB to pass 'A'
level accessibility. None were found to have reached 'AA' or 'AAA'
standard.

However, some eight councils in the sample - Barking and Dagenham,
Chester, Dudley, Hertfordshire, Reigate and Banstead, Stockport,
Stroud and Tameside - claimed 'AAA' accessibility at the time of
testing, even though the RNIB found that six of these sites did not even
reach single 'A' accessibility, and Reigate and Banstead and Tameside
are only single 'A' sites. In addition Liverpool claimed 'AAA' for
large parts of its site, and 'AA' for the rest, though the RNIB found it
did not even meet 'A' level. However, since publishing a report on
these discrepancies in our sister publication E-Government Bulletin,
Stroud District Council has removed the misleading logos from its web
site.

Three other sites in the sample - Gloucestershire, Tower Hamlets and
Watford - claimed 'AA' level, although they were not even 'A' level
according to RNIB.

And six councils - Kensington and Chelsea, Kirklees, Maidstone,
Swale, Tamworth and Wrexham - all claimed 'A' status when only
Kensington and Chelsea and Tamworth were entitled to do so,
according to the RNIB.

In all, 16 councils in the sample of 68, or 23.5 per cent, were making
claims about their accessibility which were not borne out by the
RNIB's assessment.

The RNIB says it stands by its assessments of all the sites, and that no
council site reached 'AA' or 'AAA' standards of accessibility when it
tested them in December last year, despite current government
guidelines specifying that public sector sites should reach 'AA'
compliance wherever possible.

Donna Smillie, who heads the RNIB's web accessibility team, said the
E-Access Bulletin research tallied with her own experience. "I also
have found big discrepancies between what is claimed and what is
found. The biggest problem with this is that it devalues the logos - if a
site is claiming a certain level people won't trust it, because more often
than not they don't comply."

She said one possible reason for the discrepancies could be that
councils are simply running automated checks for accessibility, which
sometimes seem to specify that a certain level has been reached, when
in fact further manual checks are always needed to ensure a site
qualifies.

The World Wide Web Consortium does not audit the use of its logos,
and is careful to point out that the system is self-policing. However, it
recommends owners of sites displaying one of the logos "use a variety
of review methods to ensure that any page using this logo meets the
conformance level claimed. Providers should also ensure that anyone
maintaining or updating the site is familiar with logo use, and either re-
reviews the page or removes the logo from the page if they are unsure
whether it still meets a specified conformance level."

The consortium is also careful to point out that use of the logo should
not simply be contingent on a site passing automated tests, and that
manual checking is always essential to determine compliance. "Please
note that use of this logo is not conditional on an automated test. There
is as yet no tool that can perform a completely automatic assessment
on the checkpoints in the guidelines, and fully automatic testing may
remain difficult or impossible," it says in a statement on its web site.

Smillie said councils should not necessarily be taken to task for small
over-claims on accessibility, but that where major discrepancies are
found, web site users would be within their rights to complain.

"We found that failures at 'AA' level for example are often quite small
technical issues, that might impact on a few web users, but not many.
So maybe, in the context of an aspiration to meet 'AA', a site could be
entitled to use a logo.

"But where claims are wildly inaccurate, it is legitimate to query why
this should be. For example, to ask why a site is claiming 'AAA'
accessibility, where its 'ALT' tags [to provide text descriptions for
images] are not useful."

She said the problems arise from a situation where there is very little
independent audit of sites for accessibility. Currently in the UK, the
RNIB's own 'See it Right' service is the only audit in operation, and
its scope is restricted by the size of its review team.

But there is an initiative in hand to address the problem at a European
level, Smillie said. The 'Support-EAM' project (http://www.support-
eam.org) is attempting to define a European Accessibility Mark based
on existing international guidelines, which could be used as the basis
for clear independent audit across the continent. Only those
organisations who had been properly audited would be able to display
the mark.

[Section Four ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technician - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]


