+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 68, AUGUST 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 68 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Talking Cash Machines Go Live in New Zealand
- Credit unions unveil state of the art technology.

02: Orange Admission Over Switching Off Wildfire
- Telecoms company underestimated depth of user feeling.

03: 'Huge Talent Pool Squandered' If Technology Inaccessible
- US analyst issues warning to mainstream industry.

04: Onetel Most Accessible of Telecoms Web Sites
- But charity survey finds many with poor records.

News in Brief:
05: Audible Monopoly - accessible board game; 06: Working Practice
- inclusive office design; 07: Tactile Nomination - European awards.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Blog Suggestion - content system; 09: Talking Bank - web
recommendation; 10: Show Schedule - BBC7 radio listings; 11: Game
Check - chess query; 12: Life Story - seeking inspirational tales.

Section Three - Technology Focus - MP3 Players.
13: The Portable Audio Revolution: portable MP3 players such as
iPods are everywhere - but are they accessible to users with impaired
vision? Mel Poluck reports.

Section Four: Focus - Inclusive Design.
14: A New Cash Fund Seeks New Ideas: digital technologies can open
up many new educational opportunities to people with disabilities. Will
Pearson of the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the
Arts unveils a new scheme to boost innovation in this field.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: e-Access'05
- 14 September 2005, CBI conference Centre, London.
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess05/

E-Access'05 is a new major national exhibition and conference
examining all the issues surrounding access to new technologies,
information and digital services by all. Speakers include Jonathan
Hassell, BBC New Media; John Williams, founder of internet TV
channel at508.com; and Kevin Carey, vice-chair of RNIB.

Attendance costs just 145 pounds for public sector and 195 pounds for
private sector delegates. Come along and experience what is shaping
up to be the UK's largest ever event focused on access to technology
by all. For more see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess05/ .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Talking Cash Machines Go Live in New Zealand.

New Zealand's first talking bank cash machines (ATMs) have been
installed by 13 branches of the country's credit unions, it was
announced last month.

And all machines installed in future will have speech capability,
according to the New Zealand Association of Credit Unions
( NZACU - http://www.nzacu.org.nz/ ).

Customers of the not-for-profit unions, which provide banking and
insurance services, can access the ATMs through a universal
headphone socket using any standard set of headphones.

As well as providing vision-impaired users with greater independence,
the new machines also enable more privacy when carrying out
transactions, NZACU spokesperson Vicky Mackenzie told E-Access
Bulletin.

"What's really good about the machines is that the screen goes blank
once you plug the headphone in, so a sighted person standing close by
would not be able to see or hear what transactions are being carried
out," Mackenzie said.

The talking ATMs also provide users with detailed information about
their withdrawals. "The machine tells the user the number of notes that
have been dispensed. New Zealand currency varies only very slightly
in size and the notes feel quite similar so it would be difficult to tell
what denomination they are. But with the machine, if you withdrew
100 dollars, it would tell you that you've received five notes or 10
notes or two notes, so you would know what denomination they are
in," said Mackenzie.

"The [New Zealand] banks do not have this facility available and the
Association of Blind Citizens of New Zealand have been pressuring
them to make a change but they have met with the same response as
you have in the UK," said Mackenzie. "However, with the Credit
Unions being the first to release these ATMs, there would be a fair
amount of social pressure now on other financial institutions to
upgrade," she said.

A recent E-Access Bulletin investigation revealed that most major
High Street banks in the UK have no plans to introduce talking cash
machines in the near future ( see also Issue 67, July 2005).


+02: Orange Admission Over Switching Off Wildfire.

The mobile phone operator Orange has admitted it underestimated the
strength of feeling among vision-impaired users which has followed
the withdrawal of Wildfire, a system which allowed people to access
services using voice commands.

Plans to scrap the service, announced earlier this year, led users to
campaign for the decision to be reversed, gaining widespread media
coverage. Orange responded by delaying the closure, but the axe
finally fell on Wildfire in July, after five years
( http://www.orange.co.uk/wildfire/ ).

The service was particularly valued by vision-impaired users because it
enabled them to search for contact details, make calls, and manage
messages using voice commands instead of the phone keypad.

"One thing we've learned from Wildfire is that we didn't appreciate
how much this service meant to vision-impaired users," Jonathan Rose,
Orange head of communications told E-Access Bulletin. The closure
prompted some users to launch campaign web sites such as the
Campaign to Access Orange
( http://www.croftsfamily.com/campaigntoaccessorange/ ).

According to Rose, the decision to scrap Wildfire was taken for a
combination of technical and business reasons. "We don't have the
ability to maintain the Wildfire platform," he said. He said Orange
does now have a team that is actively looking at how to deliver longer
term benefits to customers with disabilities, although he declined to
give any specific details.

The company is offering former Wildfire users free use of TALKS
( http://www.scansoft.com/speechworks/talks/ ),
a text-to-speech engine for mobile handsets, and a handset upgrade if
needed. Customers should dial 294 from their Orange phones to find
out more. However, TALKS does not interpret voice commands like
Wildfire, which was installed on a remote server.


+03:  'Huge Talent Pool Squandered' If Technology Inaccessible.

A huge talent pool in every profession is set to be squandered unless
technology companies can ensure better accessibility to computers and
information, a leading US assistive technology broadcaster will tell a
UK accessibility conference next month.

Accessible digital materials can increase opportunities in all areas of
life for people with disabilities, but users must ensure mainstream
technology companies pay more attention to their needs, according to
John Williams, founder of US-based internet TV station AT508.com
(http://at508.com/ ). The station is named after Section 508 of the US
Rehabilitation Act.

"Most employers still have the idea that people with disabilities can not
do the work that able-bodied people do," said Williams, who will
deliver an address at E-Access'05 in London on 14 September
(http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess05/ ).
The conference is hosted by the publishers of E-Access Bulletin and
supported, among others, by the broadcaster BSkyB; the RNIB;
content management systems specialist Jadu; web speech-enabler
Browsealoud and the Society of Public Information Networks (SPIN).

"The conference can expand the awareness of the availability of
[assistive technology] products," Williams said. "I am hoping to see
new products, meet manufacturers and advocates and learn what is
being done by governments in other countries."


+04: Onetel Most Accessible of Telecoms Web Sites

Onetel ( http://www.onetel.co.uk ) has topped the results of a survey on
the accessibility of UK telecommunications companies' web sites,
published this week by the charity AbilityNet
(http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/ ).

Kingston Communications ( http://www.kcom.com/ ) also gained a
high rating for its site in the survey, which used both automated and
manual accessibility checks.

AbilityNet also asked all companies surveyed to make a public
commitment to web accessibility to which only Kingston
Communications; Onetel; O2; Telewest; and Vodafone agreed. The
remaining sites - BT; NTL; Orange; T Mobile; and 3 - failed to meet
basic accessibility criteria, and failed to sign up to the accessibility
commitment.

"[The report] encourages other companies to focus their minds," said
Jon Gooday, senior consultant at AbilityNet. He said often there is one
individual within an organisation keen to enhance the accessibility of
their web site, but without access to resources or support from senior
managers, the work cannot be carried out. Gooday said this report
could help such individuals by raising awareness.

AbilityNet's next web accessibility report will focus on UK utility
companies.


++News in Brief:

+05: Audible Monopoly: A new audible version of the famous board
game Monopoly has been launched by the accessible games site
Kitchen's Inc. Players can compete against the computer or invite up to
five others to play:
http://www.kitchensinc.net .

+06: Working Practice: Guidance on inclusive design in offices has
been published in a new book aimed at managers and architects,
published by RNIB access consultancy JMU Partnership. 'The
accessible office' covers standards, research and regulations:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/bco1 .

+07: Tactile Nomination: GRAB, A European research project to
develop tactile and audible versions of three-dimensional computer
graphics has been shortlisted for the European Commission's 1 million
euro Descartes Research Prize. The winner will be announced in
December. GRAB's test applications include a 3D city map and an
adventure game:
http://www.grab-eu.com .

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Techshare 2005
- Early Bird Rate to 1 October
- 17-18 November, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK.

Techshare 2005 is an international event for professionals interested in
technology and the role it plays for people with sight problems. The
conference will take place on 17 and 18 November with pre-
conference workshops - newly announced - on the 16 November. It
will be held at the Jury's Inn, Birmingham.

This conference is aimed at professionals who work in the field of
sight loss or have an interest in technology. Packed with presentations
and workshops, Techshare is a fantastic opportunity to meet with
experts and other professionals in your field.

To register visit:
http://www.techshare.org.uk .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Blog Suggestion: Tom Worthington IT strategy consultant and
Director of TomW Communications in Australia, writes in response to
our June story 'Many Blogs Impossible to Access.' "On a positive
note, I found the Atutor Learning Content Management System
( http://www.atutor.ca/ )
is reasonably accessible and just about works on mobile phones as
well. But given it comes from the Adaptive Technology Resource
Centre, that is not surprising. Perhaps they need to do some blog
software."
[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com ]


+09: Talking Bank: Graham Wilkins from Gillingham in Kent, UK
writes in to add to our ongoing contributions on accessible banking,
with praise for HSBC's First Direct web site. "I didn't expect much joy
when I tried accessing my First Direct account using speech, but I was
very impressed," he says. "I could navigate the pages, with some
patience because of the number of repeated links, read my statements,
and make a bank transfer payment using speech. I am running
Window-Eyes version five on Windows XP, and used Internet
Explorer.

"I helped my son access his new account with First Direct with exactly
the same version of Window-Eyes on a different computer and we had
problems, particularly moving between the on-screen elements and
having all the text read out. I am assuming there is something different
in the setup of our screen readers, though what it may be I have as yet
to find out."
[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com ]


+10: Show Schedule: Jim Taylor writes in to offer a source for BBC7
digital radio programme listings: "For those using DAB radios, there is
a weekly, detailed guide to BBC7 programmes, distributed every
Thursday morning. The guide, as far as possible, is designed by a blind
person to suit the needs, and quirks, of speech synthesisers. For a
sample week's programmes, subscribe to:
bbc7-listings@yahoogroups.com
Regards and happy listening."


+11: Game Check: Loh Kong Ken writes: I am a keen blind chess
player from Malaysia. Does anyone know any web site where I can
play chess online? Your assistance is greatly appreciated!"
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ]


+12: Life Story: Finally, a request from E-Access Bulletin: If readers
have their own true story to tell about an inspiring trip or episode in
their life involving any aspect of the use of access technologies, please
email Mel Poluck on mel@headstar.com . Your story may be
published in the bulletin!

[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three - Technology Focus
- MP3 Players.

+13: The Portable Audio Revolution
By Mel Poluck.

It seems like every other person in the street these days is wearing an
MP3 player to listen to music: they are the 'Walkman' of the present
day, and even more popular than those original portable music devices.

It is no surprise therefore that MP3 players have also proven hugely
popular with blind and vision-impaired people, with their capacity to
fit a vast amount of music or other audio content into a tiny device that
fits comfortably in the pocket.

The problem for vision-impaired users comes with the accessibility of
the device itself, such as the design of its screen or its buttons.

For example, when Sue Allard of the British Retinitis Pigmentosa
Society bought Creative Labs' Nomad ZenXtra MP3 player
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/creative1 )
she had some vision, and could navigate her way around it using a
magnifier

"However, now I can no longer see the screen, I have had to give up
quite a few of its features as it is menu-based," she says. Without a
text-to-speech option, Allard says she no longer has access to features
such as 'bookmarking,' an experience she describes as "really
frustrating.

"I have worked out how to get to the list of albums, artists and authors
and can locate individual books or tracks by storing them in
alphabetical order, but I can no longer use playlists. It's a brilliant but
not accessible machine," Allard says.

One advantage of music storage devices for vision-impaired users is
that they neatly double up as audio book players, and can be used to
listen to 'podcasts': a term for distribution of audio content over the
internet such as that used by many internet radio stations.

On the other hand, most standard players are not as sophisticated or
flexible as the generally larger, specialist devices which are designed
purely to play back audio books. "Most mainstream MP3 players offer
few navigation options," says Anna Dresner, Publishing Associate
from the National Braille Press in the US and author of 'The iPod
Experience: Gaining Access to the iPod shuffle'
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/nbp1 ).

"If you're trying to read particular pages or look something up in a
reference book, you need [standard e-book format] DAISY navigation
features," Dresner says. "DAISY's ability to synchronise text and audio
is a very exciting idea as well, because it would make it possible to
search for specific words, check the spelling of unfamiliar words and
make the book available to deafblind people if a Braille display could
be used with the DAISY device."

However, there are MP3 players designed with vision-impaired users
in mind, and which handle e-books well. The Book Port
( http://sun1.aph.org/products/bp_bro.html )
from the American Printing House for the Blind
( http://www.aph.org )
for example, plays music files, DAISY files, and text, including Word
documents and has more advanced navigation features than
mainstream players.

The problem with Book Ports, however, is that they use removable
media. "You are then faced with organising, carrying and sorting
memory cards," Allard says. "With my Nomad I have my entire music
collection with me at all times and just about as many Audible books
as I can download; and all in a device a bit bigger than a cigarette
packet."

While levels of accessibility vary from player to player, Apple's iPod
Shuffle - a device the size, shape and weight of a cigarette lighter with
the most basic of buttons and space for 120 tracks and up to 120 hours
of audio book time - rates high for accessibility.

"Except for the battery gauge, the iPod Shuffle is completely
accessible, and very easy to use," Dresner says. "The major
disadvantage is that Windows does not treat it like a standard USB
drive, so you have to use other software to manage it, and iTunes, the
most common iPod management program, is difficult to use without
scripts or set files," she says. "This means that you have to spend more
money to get software that allows you to manage it effectively."

To answer this problem, last month Brian Hartgen, technical consultant
at UK-based assistive technology consultancy TandT Limited, released
accessible scripts for 'iTunes,'
(http://www.tandt-consultancy.com/itunesscripts.html ),
allowing vision-impaired users of the JAWS for Windows screen-
reader to manage their music files. It costs 30 pounds.

Other solutions include Steve Holmes's Window-Eyes set files for
iTunes
(http://www.holmesgrown.com/window-eyes/itunes.zip )
and the Anapod Explorer
( http://www.redchairsoftware.com/anapod/ )
from Red Chair Software in the US which costs about 20 pounds. This,
according to Hartgen, allows you to "treat your iPod a little like
windows explorer in the sense that you can copy files to and from the
device using explorer as an interface."

So the market for both mainstream and specialist MP3 players is
expanding, and for those devices that are inaccessible, solutions are
emerging at a rapid pace. The MP3 revolution continues.

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four - Focus
- Inclusive Design.

+14: A New Cash Fund Seeks New Ideas
by Will Pearson.

There is ever greater acknowledgement in UK education that primary
accessibility of technology resources is a fundamental right of all
students and teachers.

With legislation in place, and burgeoning support networks among
teachers and parents, inclusive schooling often incorporates advanced
digital technologies alongside non-technological teaching approaches.
More teachers than ever before are aware of the existence and
capabilities of screen readers, Braille displays, text-to-speech, and
British Sign Language avatars, among other access tools.

However, the debate around inclusion has seemed to shift over recent
months from primary accessibility of educational materials to the need
for a more radical overhaul of the entire structure and fabric of
classrooms to create the kinds of flexible teaching solutions that so
many parents and teachers desire.

Into this debate steps inclusive design, sometimes known as design for
all, or universal design for learning. It is at heart a moral position that
states quite bluntly that separate and distinct resources for diverse
learner groups, while helping them attain against normative assessment
scales, can leave them without an understanding of other needs and
other possibilities, and lacking in vital social interaction.

Inclusive design, in the words of a recent Design Council briefing, is a
challenge: "The challenge is to use design as a tool for delivering on
social and political expectations of equality and inclusivity, and so
create a supportive environment of buildings, products, services and
interfaces that makes it possible for everyone to live independent and
fulfilling lives."

The Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST) in the US has
since 1984 championed digital technologies as the key to modelling
and promoting the principles of inclusive design. The inherent
flexibility of digital materials mean that transformations, changes in
scale, contrast, use of multiple media and input and output options
have been employed to address student learning needs.

However, this can be seen as having yoked input and output to
accessibility too tightly, and specialisation has occurred to create very
exclusive products. These are valuable tools, allowing researchers and
consumers to test to the limits the capabilities of the internet, for
instance.

One concern voiced by Bob Regan, head of accessibility at
Macromedia, at a design conference in Brazil last December was that
the single biggest failure of accessibility expertise is the lack of
engagement with designers from a wide enough spectrum, from
products designers through to software developers. It is almost as if
aesthetic sensibilities, wide use and multiple functionality were
somehow "detracting" from the core, primary accessibility, and
worked counter to it in some way.

Inclusive design decisively challenges this separation. UK educational
resources need a boost from new and innovative resources that can tear
down some of the barricades, and a new fund may just hold the answer.

Inclusive Views
( http://www.nesta.org.uk/inclusiveviews )
is a new fund from the National Endowment for Science, Technology
and the Arts (NESTA) that aims to advance the use of inclusive design
within learning tools and applications.

The fund has launched its first Call for Ideas which seeks to take early
stage ideas for learning technologies through to market, providing seed
investment and long term royalties for the selected four ideas. Working
side by side with Inclusive Technology Limited, NESTA will be keen
to evaluate hardware and software products that will be sold through
Inclusive Technology's extensive networks.

Anyone can apply through the web site listed above: applications
received so far range from games designers wishing to create fully
inclusive 3D game worlds, to those wishing to use virtual reality
avatars to guide users around learning resources on mobile phones.

All ideas will be judged by an expert panel after the closing date at the
end of September. Members of the panel are already excited about the
new solutions that might emerge.

NOTE: Will Pearson is programme manager, NESTA Learning at
NESTA.

[Section Four ends]


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technician - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.] 
