+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 72, DECEMBER 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 72 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: European Public Sector Fails On Basic Web Accessibility.
- only three per cent of sites reach 'level A' standard.

02: Pilots for User Preference Smartcard Go Live in New Year
- card customises settings of public terminals like cash machines.

03: 'Podcast' on Assistive Technology for Schools Goes Live
-  advice and information for students, teachers and parents.

04: Accessibility Accreditation to Use Vision-Impaired Testers
- RNIB and AbilityNet Join Forces on New Web Audit.

News in Brief: 05: Personal Contact - software for deafblind PAC
Mate users; 06: Command Control - simplified voice recognition tool;
07: Favourite Things - web preferences toolbar; 08: Guide Correction
- Describe Online Glasgow details.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
09: Information Rights - European law suggestion; 10: Colour Sources
- online web design resources sought; 11: Readers Needed - online
library seeks testers.

Section Three: Techshare Report I - A DAISY Browser.
12: Electronic Books - Online and On Demand. Derek Parkinson
reports from the RNIB's flagship annual access technology event on a
powerful new way of accessing e-books over the web.

Section Four: Techshare Report II - Access to mobile phones.
13: Free Learning Blended With Treacle: A pioneering course in
Harrow combining classroom teaching with e-learning will soon help
vision-impaired people anywhere access mobile telephony. Dan
Jellinek reports.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: European Public Sector Fails On Basic Web Accessibility.

Just three per cent of public sector web sites in the European Union
(EU) reach accepted minimum international standards of accessibility,
according to UK government-funded research published last month.

The results were obtained by carrying out automated and manual
checks on 436 public sector web sites across all 25 member states of
the EU. The checks were designed to show how well the sites
measured up to the World Wide Web Consortium's Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG -
http://www.w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT/ ),
that grade sites 'A', 'AA', or 'AAA', in rising order of accessibility.

According to the research, only three per cent reached 'A' status,
although a further 27 per cent narrowly missed out, either because they
passed all automated checks but failed a manual inspection, or failed a
small number of automated checks. No sites were found to reach 'AA'
or 'AAA' status.

"I had expected and hoped that governments were doing better,"
accessibility expert Helen Petrie, Professor of Computer Science at the
University of York, told E-Access Bulletin. "Such a low level of
conformance is disappointing and shows that we have a mountain to
climb."

The report, 'eAccessibility of public sector services in the European
Union',
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/eur6 ),
was commissioned as part of the UK's presidency of the EU. It
revealed that few member states know how well they are doing in the
accessibility field: of the 25, only six felt able to estimate the
proportion of their web sites meeting 'A' requirements, but all six were
found to have overestimated.

The poor showing may partly be explained by the fact that the WCAG
are not available in all EU languages. At present, the guidelines aren't
available in the national languages of Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Greece, Latvia, Malta and Slovenia; and a number of other minority
languages. Translations are in progress for the languages of Poland and
the Slovak Republic.


+02: Pilots for User Preferences Smartcard Go Live in New Year.

Pilots of a smartcard developed to allow vision-impaired people to
customise the settings of public electronic terminals including banks'
automatic telling machines (ATMs) will begin in the new year.

The 'Special needs application programming interface' (SNAPI -
http://fastlink.headstar.com/snapi1 )
enables smartcards to carry data on user preferences such as a large
font size, once inserted into an ATM, railway ticket machine or similar
device.

"The software can use any existing or planned card scheme. And the
system could work with any terminal and its screen, subject to
the supplier using SNAPI specifications," said Geoff Doggett,
e-services card manager at Mid Suffolk District Council, and SNAPI
project manager. "Currently, all the accessibility options in Windows
XP and 2000 [are stored on SNAPI]," Doggett said. "One of the great
benefits is that simply withdrawing the card resets the computer
automatically for the next person".

The pilots will begin in January at libraries in Cambridge and Suffolk;
at the RNIB resource centre in London; and at several colleges and
schools. Its developers are also currently creating partnerships with
terminal suppliers and service providers and looking at ways to make
the cards available to a larger number of people. Lessons learned from
the pilots will be disseminated at a workshop in May 2006 where the
project will be formally launched, Doggett said.

SNAPI has been developed by the RNIB, Mid Suffolk Council
and the Black Country Knowledge Society
( http://www.bcks.org.uk/ ),
a regional partnership of public, private and voluntary bodies. The
initiative is managed by the 'Local authority smartcard standards e-
organisation' (LASSeO -
http://www.lasseo.org.uk/ ).


+03: 'Podcast' on Assistive Technology for Schools Goes Live.

A series of monthly online audio broadcasts or 'podcasts,' informing
teachers, students, parents and administrators on the use of assistive
technologies in schools and colleges, has gone live.

The service, entitled Building Educational Success Through
Technology (BEST -
http://bestpodcast.blogspot.com )
provides ideas and resources on assistive technology in education
including news and product reviews. It can be played online using a
media player such as 'real player' or 'itunes' or by downloading it onto
a personal mp3 player, allowing listeners to hear shows at any time
they choose.

"Podcasts are an innovative way of providing global access to
information and are available to anyone who has access to the
internet," said Brian Wojcik, Coordinator at the Special Educational
Assistive Technology department at Illinois State University. The
department collaborated with local education authorities and a
Chicago-based cerebral palsy charity.

In future, a 'call for help' feature will be added, Wojcik said. "The aim
of this is to provide a way for listeners to call in with questions or
issues they are facing regarding using assistive technology with
children in early childhood, in secondary classrooms or the home. We
will attempt to provide answers or provide a forum for others to."


+04: Accessibility Accreditation to Use Vision-Impaired Testers.

A new UK-based system of audit for web accessibility is using a panel
of testers with disabilities as an integral part of its accreditation
process.

The 'See It Right: UseAbility' audit is based on the RNIB's existing
'See It Right' accessibility audit, in partnership with testers recruited
by the charity AbilityNet (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/sir1 ).
It checks sites against the 'priority areas' of the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines,' from the World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C).

"We thought it would be a good idea to get an accreditation going that
included user testing rather than doing it ourselves and being a
competitor to See It Right, a popular and worthwhile award," said
Robin Christopherson, Web Consultancy Manager at AbilityNet.

"You need disabled testers if you want to make sure there are no
obstacles to technology such as screen readers," he said.

For large sites, the panel will comprise eight volunteer testers with
sensory, motor and learning impairments including three with vision
impairments to assess sites' compatibility of magnification software,
screen readers and text options found in browsers.

Web sites that pass the audit will be entitled to display an audit logo on
their home page. An unnamed high street insurance company is set to
be the first to undergo the new scheme, AbilityNet says.

The disability charity Shaw Trust operates the only other web
accessibility logo scheme, introduced a year ago, that uses a group of
disabled web testers
(http://www.shaw-trust.org.uk/ ).


++News in Brief:

+05: Personal Contact: Software for the PAC Mate personal digital
assistant has been launched allowing deafblind users to read and write
messages, send and receive emails and mobile and analogue phone
calls from vision-impaired contacts. FaceToFace, produced by PAC
Mate's maker Freedom Scientific, uses a refreshable Braille display,
bluetooth and wireless technology and costs around 700 pounds:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/face2 .

+06: Command Control: A simplified voice recognition programme
that can control a computer with a few commands has been developed
by US assistive technology firm RJ Cooper and Associates. 'Speak to
me' responds to frequently used commands such as 'save,' 'open,'
'copy and paste,' and users can ask to be directed to web pages. It costs
around 50 pounds:
http://www.rjcooper.com/speak-to-me .

+07: Favourite Things: A web browser toolbar has been launched
allowing print-impaired users including dyslexics to customise web
sites and Windows programmes according to their preferences. The
Textic Toolbar is compatible with all browsers and costs 25 pounds for
individual users:
http://www.textic.com/ .

+08: Guide Correction: Last issue, we wrote that the online guides to
central Glasgow's buildings, transport and streets produced by
Describe Online with Glasgow City Council are available in audio
format. In fact, they are available in plain text only. We would like to
apologise for this error. For more information see:
http://www.describe-online.com/glasgow/ .

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+09: Information Rights: John Nissen, founder of inclusive technology
company Cloudworld
( http://www.cloudworld.co.uk )
writes in response to Kevin Carey's feature in our October issue on the
recent EU Communication on accessibility, which he labelled a "waste
of time."

Nissen says: "[Carey's] comments set me thinking that what is needed
is to establish access to information as a basic human right. This would
open up all sorts of possibilities: taking organisations to the Court of
Human Rights would be the ultimate recourse.

"For Europe, we could have something like the US's Section 508,
whereby "reasonable accommodation" has to be made for access to
information and services for people with a disability.

"One would need to define 'information' as 'information relevant to
oneself,' [for example:] information for education, health,
employment, government, voting, financial, legal, and personal data
held by organisations about oneself. One would need to define 'access'
as 'equality of access as regards cost and convenience, whatever one's
age or disability and the information must be made available in a
timely fashion.

"Some information would be withheld for security and confidentiality
reasons, and some information one might have to pay for, but
otherwise all information should be freely available on a need to know
basis. Regarding the internet, everybody should have equal access, on
the assumption that anybody might need to know anything."
[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+10: Colour Sources: John Starbuck of Wakefield Council in the UK
writes in to follow up his query in our October issue about web-based
colour-blindness tests. He says: "My main concern at present is to find
a good source to direct web page designers towards, so they can
appreciate the problems. All too often, they tend to think that including
more text than images and ensuring the text can be enlarged will
suffice to deal with vision problems, but I need to show that more has
to be done.

"The Web Accessibility guides don't seem to cover colour-blindness
very well, although I believe cyan is recommended for backgrounds."
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+11: Readers Needed: Tony Dart of the online library 'The Seeing Ear'
writes with a request for testers. He says: "The library
( http://www.seeingear.org )
is totally internet-based. All the books are electronic text files and can
be read on virtually any reading machine, Braille terminal or computer.
To access the library you have to fill in a simple registration form
online. There are no charges for members and membership is open to
UK and EU vision-impaired people.

"We are looking for vision-impaired people who will test the site with
a variety of hardware and software and point out any problems so they
can be fixed during the next month." The library launches in January
2006.
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com]

[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three - Techshare Report I
- A DAISY Browser.

+12: Electronic Books - Online and On Demand
by Derek Parkinson.

Many barriers stand between vision-impaired people and accessible
books, delegates heard at this year's Techshare conference, the RNIB's
flagship access technology event
( http://www.techshare.org.uk).

Piotr Brzoza and Ryszard Winiarczyk of the Silesian University of
Technology in Poland
(http://www.polsl.pl/),
demonstrated how new browser technology might help overcome some
of these barriers.

A very small proportion of all books published are provided in formats
such as Braille, because of the high cost of doing so and the relatively
small market for them, said Brzoza. Electronic formats such as cassette
tape made talking books easier to produce and to market, leading to a
great increase in the availability of accessible material. The arrival of
digital technologies promised another leap forward, but progress has
been slower than expected for several reasons, he said.

Manufacturers of desktop software have developed so-called e-book
formats, enabling vision-impaired people to access books on a range of
devices such as dedicated e-book players, home computers and palm-
top computers. However, these formats are usually the property of the
software companies, and are often incompatible with each other.

In response, during the 1990s work began on an open, standards-based
alternative known as the Digital Accessible Information System
(DAISY -
http://www.daisy.org/ ).
The same period witnessed the explosion of content on the internet,
and efforts to develop assistive technology such as screen readers.

But both DAISY and screen readers have their limitations, delegates
heard. So-called Digital Rights Management (DRM) systems -
technologies designed to prevent illegal copying of material - can also
prevent screen readers accessing digital content. On the other hand,
although DAISY technology is widely praised for its accessibility, it
needs complete files to be downloaded to a computer hard drive or a
compact disc before the content can be read.

"Downloading an entire book is time-consuming, particularly for
people who want to use a library to access a large number of books on
a particular topic, for example," said Brzoza.

To remedy this problem, Brzoza, Winiarczyk, and their colleagues at
the Silesian University of Technology built a content management
system and a web browser that can access content in the DAISY
format over the internet, as and when the user requests it. The team
have since used the technology to access the library catalogue and
books at the Laski School for the Blind in Poland
( http://www.laski.edu.pl/).

"It can play books online, it works with the library multimedia system,
and it provides useful DAISY functions like bookmarks and notes in
the text," said Brzoza. The browser component can be downloaded for
free at the Key Foundation web site
( http://www.key.org.pl ),
he said.

Many delegates wanted to know more. Did the system enable many
users to access the same content at the same time? Did it allow readers
to skip text like a standard DAISY player? Yes, it could do both these
things, said Brzoza. Some delegates wanted to know how expensive it
would be to install the system. He explained that although the browser
is available free, there would have to be a charge for using the content
management system.

The presentation attracted a great deal of interest, as a practical
example of how DAISY technology can be adapted for online content.

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.

Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.

Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.

For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four - Techshare report II
- Access to Mobile Phones.

+13: Free Learning Blended with Treacle
by Dan Jellinek.

A unique online training resource bank to help blind and vision-
impaired people use mobile phones was unveiled at this year's RNIB
Techshare conference by a team from Harrow Council in London.

The 'blended learning' package combines classroom-based learning
with online learning, and teaches people how to use software to make
the phone talk for phoning and text messaging, plus other software that
can magnify the screen. A prototype version of the online learning
module plus full classroom notes to enable other learning providers to
deliver all parts of the course will be made freely available on the web
by Christmas, Harrow Adult and Community Learning Programme
Development Officer Karen Bhamra told E-Access Bulletin.

"We've created a resource bank aimed at tutors, with all the resources,
lesson plans and so on that you need to run a course," Bhamra said.
"There is also an e-learning element, with tests."

When complete, the resource will be made available on the web at:
http://www.learninharrow.org.uk
by following the link to 'Online Courses'. The project was made
possible by funding from the enticingly named Project TrEACL
(pronounced 'treacle'), which stands for Technology to Enhance Adult
and Community Learning. Some 23 projects across England have been
funded in round three of this programme, including the Harrow work
(see http://www.aclearn.net/display.cfm?page=951 for more on
TrEACL).

Alex Hills, chair of the Middlesex Association for the Blind which has
partnered with Harrow on the project, said the project had begun by
some work with a focus group of people with impaired vision, to select
a preferred mobile phone handset to use in the training course.

The group looked at a few models and eventually selected the Nokia
3230 handset to use with Mobile Speak talking phone software. "There
are a number of handsets that we could have used - they just need to
run the Symbian phone operating system - but we felt as a group that
the 3230 was the most tactile, with an easy layout," Hills said.

"Personally I find the 'clear' and 'edit' keys a bit hard to use, and if
you've never used a mobile phone before it takes a while, but you do
get familiar with it. And a range of users generally found the 3230 was
the easiest to use."

The next step was to test and evaluate some draft classroom and web-
based training materials, with sample lessons. All training in Harrow
has been offered free of charge to learners, using volunteers for the
teaching.

The Mobile Speak software package for mobile phones was purchased
for the course from Optelec
(http://www.optelec.co.uk),
part of the Tieman Group which is the exclusive distributor of the
software in Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, the UK and the US. As
well as English, Mobile Speak is available to buy and download in
Arabic, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Icelandic, Italian,
Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish Swedish and Turkish. The screen
magnifier used in the lessons is Mobile Magnifier, also from Optelec.

"There is a point in loading Mobile Speak onto a phone where users do
need sighted assistance," Hills said. "It's unfortunate but it's a fact. But
the training documents including the schemes of work and lesson plans
are available in accessible text files."

Louise Hamilton, Outreach Tutor at the Harrow learning centre, said
the Harrow team had learned some important lessons in developing
training courses for people with impaired vision in previous work they
had done developing training materials for people in using the Book
Courier electronic book reader.

"For example, it is vital in a class not to have two people talking at
once in a room, for example with more than one working group: only
one person must talk at a time, with the others listening.

"It is also important to explain what you are going to do first at each
stage, and then do it, as people cannot pick up visual clues. The focus
group sessions were also useful in helping to pick up on technical
words that some people couldn't understand."

It is also important to start each lessons with a reminder of the basics,
Hamilton said. "Every lesson at the start we do familiarisation so the
learners remember where the keys are," she said.

Future plans include some videoing of learners as they move on from
the lessons to going out into the real world of the high street mobile
phone shop and try to buy a handset and download Mobile Speak for
themselves, she said. "We needed to have some evidence to show our
funders the work has been successful, so we are asking learners if they
are going to buy a phone if they could video the process."

Other plans include working with mobile phone dealers and
manufacturers to disseminate the fruits of their work, Hills said. "We
hope to work in partnership with the main dealers and manufacturers to
see if we can include our training material at the point of sale," he said.

The courses will help people use their phones, including SMS text
messaging, but it was not really possible to access much information
on the web yet over a mobile, Hills said.

"Access to the web using a mobile phone is still in its infancy - there is
a bit of hype but not a lot people are doing it," he said. "Web site
owners need to design their sites so it can be accessed by a mobile, like
the BBC's mobile site
http://www.bbc.co.uk/mobile .
But it will be better developed in future."

[Section Four ends]


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

