+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 62, FEBRUARY 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 62 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Organisations join to create free IT support helpline
- advice service for UK computer users with disabilities.

02: Democratic picture icons for low-vision users
- initiative to help people navigate council web sites.

03: Talking tactile device for educational diagrams
- National Curriculum aid for the classroom.

04: First accessible strategy game to launch
- ground-breaking release from VIP Games Zone.

News in Brief: 05: Early Day - MPs' petition; 06: HumanWare Born -
Pulse Data merges with VisuAide; 07: Improved Recorder - accessible
CD and DVD burner.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Format Appeal - accessible bank statements continued; 09:
Reader's Block - Google's digital library service inaccessible.

Section Three: Focus - European Centre for Accessible Media.
10: Raising the Bar: Leading accessibility campaigner Kevin Carey has
unveiled a proposal to establish a European centre for accessible
broadcasting and web standards, and the idea is gathering momentum.
Mel Poluck reports.

Section Four: Gaming - Multi-User Dungeons (MUDS).
11: In a World of Fantasy, Anything Can Happen: Gabriele Battaglia
reveals a parallel universe online of adventure worlds that are
mysterious, beautiful - and accessible.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: Countdown to Vision 2005 - Register Now.

It is just a few weeks now until the world's biggest ever event on low
vision and sight loss - Vision 2005. More than 600 presentations,
discussions and workshops will take place during the conference with
speakers and delegates from 60 countries attending.

Sessions within the theme of 'Advances in technology and designing
for an inclusive environment' will include: accessible information; e-
learning; web sites; multi-media; reading through technologies;
DAISY; and IT demonstrations.

Vision 2005 takes place at London's Queen Elizabeth II Conference
Centre from Monday 4 to Thursday 7 April 2005. For more
information or to register, go to:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/vision2005/ .

[Special notice ends]


++Section One: News.

+01: Organisations Join to Create Free IT Support Helpline.

A new partnership between two charities looks set to boost the levels
of IT support and accessibility advice available to disabled computer
users.

AbilityNet (http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/), which provides advice,
training and assessments of computer needs for disabled people, has
joined forces with ITCH Network (http://www.itcanhelp.org.uk/), a
volunteer programme within the British Computer Society
(http://www.bcs.org/bcs/), to provide free IT support to disabled people
across the UK.

The charities have created a single helpline for computer-related
enquiries (0800 269545) and are pooling their resources and expertise
to offer a more comprehensive service to end users.

"While ITCH volunteers tend to help disabled people in their homes
with everyday problems, such as installing and upgrading software,
getting started on the internet and combating viruses, AbilityNet's
consultants can provide individual assessments of computer needs and
advice on assistive technologies," says Tom Mangan, vice-chairman of
ITCH Network. "This means that when our volunteers recognise that a
more complex solution to a client's computer access problems is
required, they can refer to the client to AbilityNet."

AbiltyNet will also provide specialist training for ITCH Network
volunteers to help them solve simple access problems. For example,
ITCH volunteers could help a vision-impaired person adjust operating
systems settings to aid magnification or help them with keystroke
shortcuts for magnification software.

ITCH currently has some 250 volunteers in the UK and a significant
proportion of its enquiries come from blind and vision-impaired users.
Demand for its services is currently growing at 25 per cent a year and
so it views the link-up with AbilityNet as a way of boosting service
coverage.


+02: Democratic Picture Icons for Low-Vision Users.

An online resource to help local councils equip web sites with picture
icons to help users with low vision is to launch in March, in a bid to
improve access to local democracy.

The icons will be made available as part of the four million pound
government-funded national project for local e-democracy. When the
project's site goes live, it will be at: http://www.e-democracy.gov.uk .

According to their developer Community Living
(http://www.communityliving.org.uk/), the new picture icons will be
easier to identify and more meaningful than the buttons, bars and links
which are usually used to aid web site navigation. The icons can be
displayed in a range of image formats with tags for screen readers
users, and in a Flash version with audio output, said team leader
Andrew Holman.

The project will also provide councils with good practice guidelines,
including tips on producing text that is easy to read and understand.
Clearer and simpler communication from government would benefit
everyone, said Holman. "It's possible to express quite complicated
ideas using these techniques. For example, a report for Parliament on
learning and disabilities was presented in an 'easy read' format that
even government lawyers were happy with," he told E-Access Bulletin.


+03: Talking Tactile Device for Educational Diagrams.

A device that uses touch and sound to allow vision-impaired students
of all ages to "read" educational graphics and text will go on the
market next month.

The Talking Tactile Tablet, or "T3" (http://talktab.org/), allows
students to "read" maps, diagrams and other images made up of
embossed sheets with raised lines and areas, placed on top of a reader
similar in size to a laptop computer. When symbols and regions on the
tactile surface are pressed, audio information on these images is spoken
to the user.

Tactile diagrams have been developed before, but the developers of the
new system claim it has a uniquely sophisticated sound indexing and
navigation system. For example, if a student wants to locate a feature
on a map without knowing where it is, he or she can make a request
and then place a finger anywhere on the device's surface, before being
guided by speech to the desired location.

The T3 has been developed by the Royal National College for the
Blind (RNCB - http://www.rncb.ac.uk) with Anglia Polytechnic
University (http://www.apu.ac.uk/) and US assistive devices company
Touch Graphics (http://www.touchgraphics.com/).

Project manager Lesley Wells said the device could potentially be used
by students with dyslexia, early years learners or students with a print
disability. Discussions are underway with the Qualifications and
Curriculum Authority (QCA - http://www.qca.org.uk/) to allow its use
in exams.

The RNCB has developed 30 sets of diagram sheets on various topics
including the skeleton, nursery rhymes and a world atlas and intends to
cover all UK National Curriculum topics to assist mainstream
schooling for all children. The device costs 600 pounds, with sets of
sheets costing 10 to 20 pounds.


+04: First Accessible Strategy Game to Launch.

What is claimed to be the first accessible strategy game for blind and
vision-impaired people has been launched by the Israeli accessible
gaming specialist VIP Games Zone (http://www.vipgameszone.com/).

Strategy games are war-games involve the role-playing of opposing
armies or forces on a grid-based map. Galaxy Ranger
(http://www.vipgameszone.com/granger/granger.php) is set in space,
and gamers can play against the computer or online with a friend.

The online version includes a "text messenger" feature, allowing
gamers to communicate with each other during the game. The
messages can be converted to speech using the KeySpeak SAPI voice
engine (http://www.portset.co.uk/keyspeaksapivoice.htm) or a screen
reader.

Galaxy Ranger - which runs on Windows - is the eighth accessible
game from VIP Games Zone. "The idea behind all our games is that
you don't need the help of a sighted person to play them," says the
company's founder Igor Kmiletzof. "We want to make all of the types
of games currently available on the mainstream market accessible to
blind and visually impaired people. We launched Super Tennis last
year, the first accessible online sports game, and now we've launched
the first accessible online strategy game."


++News in Brief:

+05: Early Day: The RNIB with accessible search engine Net-Guide
are asking UK citizens to write to their MPs asking them to sign an
'Early Day Motion' expressing support for web accessibility issues.
Early Day Motions are a form of awareness-raising petition within
Parliament, though they do not lead to any specific legislative action.
Letters must direct MPs to "EDM 461", which can be viewed by
searching at:
http://edm.ais.co.uk .

+06: HumanWare Born: Assistive technology companies Pulse Data
International (PDI) of New Zealand and VisuAide based in Canada
have merged to create the HumanWare Group. The former chief
executive of PDI, Russell Smith, will lead the company:
http://www.humanware.com/ .

+07: Improved Recorder: Version 2.0 of accessible CD and DVD
burner Premier CD/DVD Creator has been released by US-based
company Premier Assistive Technology. Compatible with screen
readers, new features include improved album and track retrieval, the
capacity to rename tracks before they are 'ripped' and faster and more
efficient DVD burning. It costs around 30 pounds and a trial version
can be downloaded from:
http://www.premier-programming.com/cdcreator/cd_creator.htm .

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Format Appeal: Fay Rohrlach writes in from Australia to respond
to Amar Latif, who wrote in Issue 55 about bank statements in
alternative and electronic formats. "I couldn't agree with you more,"
Fay writes. "I am a vision-impaired person, and when I receive my
bank statements, I have to use an easy reader, which is a small
handheld device, when plugged into the TV, enlarges small print onto
the screen.

"I can manage with this device, but at the moment, it is out of whack,
and needs maintenance repairs yet again. But yes, the print [on bank
statements] is very small, and yes, if sighted people can receive
anything in their letterboxes at home, so too [should] we, right into our
inboxes."

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+09: Reader's Block: Katherine Schneider, Senior Psychologist, at
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire's Counselling Service writes in to
tell us about a recent disappointing exchange of correspondence she
has had with Google Print (https://print.google.com/publisher/), an
initiative from leading search engine Google which plans to digitise
library books.

Katherine says the company is doing this in a way that would make the
service inaccessible for those using screen readers. So Katherine wrote
to them: "As a blind person using a screen reader, I cannot read the
scanned image. Are you going to provide alternative access for these
scanned images, which is permitted under copyright law?"

Google Print replied: "Thank you for your email concerning Google
Print pages. Google's mission is to organise the world's information
and make it universally accessible and useful. As part of this mission,
we understand the importance of making Google Print accessible to
those who are visually impaired.

"At this time, Google Print content excerpt pages may not be
compatible with many text-to-speech applications. We're aware of this
issue, and are always working to improve the Google Print program for
all of our users. We apologise for the inconvenience, and will take your
comments into account as we move forward."

Katherine has an appeal to E-Access Bulletin readers: "Maybe people
at your level of computer knowledge can work with them to change
their minds?"

[responses to inbox@headstar.com]

[Section Two ends]


++Section Three - Focus
- European Centre for Accessible Media.

+10: Raising the Bar
by Mel Poluck.

"Digital broadcasting is the only serious way of improving the lives,
options and knowledge of half of the population.

This was the view of accessibility campaigner Kevin Carey, discussed
last month by a group of interested parties gathered in London for the
launch of Carey's plan to establish a new European Centre for
Accessible Media (ECAM).

The plan has been drawn up under the remit of Carey's fellowship
awarded by the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the
Arts (NESTA - http://www.nesta.org.uk/).
The fellowship, of almost 73,000 pounds over 20 months from January
2004, is designed to advance the development of digital broadcasting
to improve access to information, particularly for people with a
disability and the elderly
(http://www.nesta.org.uk/ourawardees/profiles/4067/index.html).

Under Carey's proposals, if ECAM is set up it is likely to be a hub for
providing accessibility resources, sharing best practice; establishing
technical standards; promoting accessibility legislation and good
practice; and undertaking training and research in accessible media.

"It will be interested in all forms of digital information, including web
accessibility, even if it is most sharply focused on television," said
Carey, who also sits on the advisory board of the broadcasting
regulator Ofcom.

Carey feels strongly that the future of accessible media will be found in
digital television rather than the web. However, the current background
of European broadcasting regulation is a "cartel model," he says,
although it is starting to break down.

"Whatever the variety of regimes, television regulation holds out the
best prospect for providing most of our people with information which
is as accessible as it can be," Carey said. "I do not think that the
regulatory framework will last. All the more important, then, to get
people so accustomed to factoring in accessibility to production
budgets that it becomes unquestioned, good practice."

One of his visions for ECAM is that it becomes a centre for best
practice in broadcasting access services: subtitling, signing and audio
description - an area, according to Carey, that needs a lot more work.

In terms of funding for the centre, one attendee, Helen Petrie, professor
of human computer interaction at City University, suggested raising
funds from the production of accessible media.

If, however, ECAM did not make a profit from this - and he specified
that the centre would not undercut other commercial operators - it
would need to raise revenue from ECAM members and other European
organisations.

Petrie said while awareness of web accessibility issues has heightened,
there are still major gaps in knowledge. This has been highlighted by
the findings of a Department of Culture, Media and Sport initiative
with which she is involved, aimed at training young web developers in
accessibility issues, she said. "They all know about web accessibility
and have looked at Web Accessibility Initiative standards, but they
don't understand the relationship between following standards and
using a web site," she said.

With that in mind, Petrie suggested that a new European centre could
play an educational role: "It could provide training to web developers,"
she said.

Carey envisages that support for ECAM would come from the
European Union, the European Broadcasting Union
(http://www.ebu.ch/en/index.php) and the Council of Europe
(http://www.coe.int/). A small, core staff would be seconded from
broadcasters, producers, regulators, academics and the voluntary
sector.

It is early days, and the seeds of Carey's plan are only beginning to
sprout. During his "voyage," as he calls it, he has already learned a lot:
for example, he has found the contrast between the world of computing
and the world of broadcasting striking.

"Computing is like the wild west. In accessibility terms you have the
messy paraphernalia of the World Wide Web Consortium with its
accessibility initiative, WAI. It can command a certain degree of
industry participation, but when the standard is delivered it is up to
national governments to decide what they will do.

"In the case of broadcasting the opposite procedure applies. There is no
government on earth that does not want to regulate broadcasting,"
Carey said.

The centre could potentially become a European centre for creating
accessibility standards in this area but the plans are still setting. "The
key decision we will have to take is whether ECAM, like its North
America cousin the National Centre for Accessible Media (NCAM -
http://ncam.wgbh.org/) should be a producer of accessible material or
whether it should simply be a high level body," said Carey. Later this
year he will visit NCAM to gather information.

"There may be a number of broadcasters, particularly in small or
applicant countries, which want ECAM to produce and modify
material but a majority of ECAM's members, being commercial
operations, may vote to stop ECAM's production work so that it is
divided between them."

Ultimately, the goal is to boost accessibility across Europe, Carey said.
"The diversity of the European situation [calls] for the establishment of
standards to which all can aspire, so that the bar in every aspect of
production and transmission is steadily raised."


[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Gaming
- Multi-User Dungeons (MUDS).

+11: In a World of Fantasy, Anything Can Happen
by Gabriele Battaglia.

Are many readers of E-Access Bulletin familiar with MUDS, I
wonder? It would take a long time to explain everything about MUDS,
which is short for 'Multi-User Dungeons': what they are, how to join
them and how to explore them. But even a brief introduction should be
enough to rouse your curiosity and to start some of you off on the road
to playing these beautiful games.

There are many MUDS. Many of these are completely accessible to
blind people, if the proper software is used. Some of them can be found
on several different platforms, specifically the ones which are
completely text-based such as Ancestral, the MUD I'm playing at the
moment.

MUDS are whole worlds in themselves. They have cities, forests,
lakes, roads, bridges, caves, inns, palaces, villages, deserts, hills and
mountains. They also feature a series of fantastic places, depending on
the chosen MUD and its temporal location. Most of them are located in
a "swords and sorcery" medieval period, in the style of the Lord of the
Rings. Also the inhabitants are more or less the same, being creatures
such as dwarves, humans, elves, fairies, giants and dragons, plus the
different crossbreeds and other much rarer and hidden creatures like
vampires, angels, half-gods, devils and more.

When we enter a MUD, we play the part of one of these characters,
created by us according to our requirements as players or just
according to our fantasy.

Characters must grow up and become strong, and possibly also rich
and respected, avoiding all the dangers of their lives. They will have
money, and skills that will increase by practising them. They will have
friends to protect and enemies to fight, or to escape from. They must
buy and sell, establish alliances and make agreements, or become part
of a group in order to be protected. They will have to develop as a
person, by learning trades or magic arts; in other words, they must
accumulate experiences.

In Ancestral, for example, the quantity of a character's experiences is
expressed by a score. When the player builds up experiences, his or her
score increases and at a certain point he or she will reach a new level.
Every level gives new skills and abilities, new powers and spells and
upgrades those already possessed. The MUD game starts at level 1 and
ends at level 50, when your character has become an avatar: practically
a god.

The great thing is that the game is never the same, because it is played
in an ever-changing community. There are many characters managed
by the computer, or NPCs (Not Playing Characters), who have
schematic behaviours, but lots of other characters are being controlled
by other real people who play their parts, as on a stage. Therefore
anything can happen, and anything can change.

Why not give it a try?

First of all, you have to prepare your computer. All Windows systems
are supported. You must download a client that works properly on a
MUD server, such as GMUD32 version 1.9, and users of the JAWS
screen reader must also download its JAWS scripts. These scripts are a
real touch of genius because they have unusual power and
functionality. The right version of the scripts we need is the last
released version, V 7.0. Both GMUD32 and its scripts can be found in
the 'Program and Script Downloads' area of the accessible technology
site GutterStar.net (http://www.gutterstar.net).

The GMUD software is completely free, while the scripts are
shareware (with a time limit); after 35 minutes, they actually lose some
of their advanced functions, although the most important ones can still
be used, and they are all you will need to play.

After installing GMUD32 and its scripts, we are ready to go online and
to enter this beautiful and fantastic world. And if, like me, you read
Italian, you can even try out my own game. All you have to do is to
open GMUD32, select "connect" from the file menu and fill in the
fields as follows: Host address of the MUD: italcomp.net, MUD Port:
4000. Ignore the other fields and buttons for now.

When you have typed OK, and possibly authorised GMUD to connect
by your firewall, you will be online and Jaws will read you all that you
have to do. Now you can start creating your character.

When you are there, remember that the keyword "WHO" will show
you the list of players who are connected to the game in that moment.
My character is a magician and his name is Nishu. If you are joining
my game, I'll be waiting there for you online!

NOTE: Gabriele Battaglia is a reader from Italy, and a former student
of the translator of our Italian language version, Margherita Giordano.

[Section Four ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Technician - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

