+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 61, JANUARY 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 61 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Opera Gains a Voice
- Advanced speech functions in new browser.

02: Safety Games Use Text-to-Speech Technology
- Fire education modules use text to speech.

03: Accessible Conversion for Technical Drawings
- European consortium develops free software.

04: Improvements Urged for Library Computer Access
- Aberdeen survey urges more equipment and training.

News in Brief: 05: Working Practice - employers' advice booklet; 06:
Game Boy - accessible interactive adventure; 07: Jaws Six - latest
screen reader; 08: TIE-In: European training newsletter.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
09: European Invitation - research questionnaire; 10: CMS Response -
recommended software; 11: Third Degree - second questionnaire; 13:
Gift Rap - accessible presents.

Section Three: Focus - Colour Contrast.
14: Readers move out of the shade: text and background colour plays a
major part in readability of information on a screen, says Peter Irons.
But awareness of the issues is low.

Section Four: My Story - Angus MacKinnon.
15: Fighting against the storm: The fascinating tale of a Canadian
man's journey to St Lucia in the Caribbean to help blind people learn
computer skills. In a tough environment, a little help went a long way.

[Contents ends].


++SPONSORED NOTICE: LocalAlert
- Accessible Email Newsletters for Councils.

Highlighted as an example of achieving Priority Outcome G3,
LocalAlert allows local authorities to disseminate information on a
wide range of topics including Planning, Liquor Licensing, Jobs,
Procurements, Committee Minutes and Crime.

Newsletters are automatically generated in either HTML, Plain Text or
Accessible Text (TEN) format, extracting content from databases as
required. And, uniquely, subscribers may restrict information to a
specified radius of their home(s).

LocalAlert also provides the ability to target consultations to specific
areas. For further details or to register for our forthcoming seminar see:
http://www.localalert.co.uk
or call Hans Grefte on 0208 4523627.

[Sponsored notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Opera Gains A Voice.

Advanced voice functions have been introduced into the latest version
of Opera, the free web browser software compatible with Apple Mac,
Windows, Solaris and Linux operating systems.

The new beta version of Opera, Opera 8, launched for testing at the end
of December 2004, allows users to browse the web using spoken
commands and to have web and email content read aloud to them.

Using a microphone and headset, users highlight the text they want
read out and say "Opera speak" to have content spoken to them. There
are 50 different voice commands, including browsing commands, such
as "Opera next link", "Opera back" or "Opera home".

The voice feature uses IBM voice technology and is currently only
available on the Windows operating system. Because it requires users
to have some sight of the screen to highlight text, the Opera browser is
principally of use to people with some residual vision.

However, the company claims that its product is "the most accessible
browser on the market" with a range of features that includes a zoom
function for enlarging content by 20 to 1000 per cent, the option to
change text size and text and link colours, and the ability to disable
animations, video or audio applications. Users can also implement their
own style sheets to customise pages as they prefer to view them.

As well as new voice functionality, the next version of the browser also
includes the ability to magnify web pages and have content adapted to
fit the width of the screen. This means that users don't have to scroll
horizontally when the web page width exceeds that of the screen - "a
compelling accessibility tool for visually impaired users," says Opera.

Although not all the browser's functions will be compatible initially
with screen readers, the company will continue to make improvements
to offer full functionality to users of assistive techology, Opera told E-
Access Bulletin.

The beta version of Opera's latest browser is available as a free
download from its web site. The final version of the browser is due to
be released at the end of February. Opera can be used freely with
advertisements and at low cost for a version without ads.


+02: Safety Games Use Text-to-Speech Technology.

Interactive online games that educate children about fire safety using
text-to-speech technology have been launched by the UK's Office of
the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM - http://www.odpm.gov.uk).

The games, called Route to Safety and Hazard a Guess (both available
at http://www.firekills.gov.uk/seniors/fun/), can be played with or
without access technology, such as screen readers. This enables a blind
or vision-impaired child to play the game together with a sighted
sibling.

The games were developed as part of an ODPM inclusion programme
to educate children who might return from school before a parent
arrives home about fire hazards, and are also available on CD.

Hazard a Guess asks players to rank the severity of fire hazards in the
home, while in Route to Safety players are asked questions about fire
safety as they roll the dice and move across the board. To play the
games online, the user has to download Macromedia's Shockwave
plug-in.


+03: Accessible Conversion for Technical Drawings.

Free software allowing vision-impaired software engineers to read
technical drawings produced in many common formats has been
released following a two-year European Commission-funded research
project.

Technical Drawings Understanding for the Blind (TeDUB -
http://www.tedub.org/) has been headed by the TeDUB Consortium
which comprises partners from the UK, Germany, Ireland, Italy and the
Netherlands.

TeDUB works by uploading diagrams, such as the "box and pointer"
diagrams often used to design family trees, to a web site where they are
converted into a compatible format and then emailed back to the user.
It has been designed to work best with diagrams created in Unified
Modeling Language (UML), a coding language often used by software
engineers to represent real-world objects.

The system also allows vision-impaired users to move around diagrams
with a joystick. It provides basic sound to accompany navigation
allowing users to hear where they are, and is also compatible with
screen readers.

The software is available by download from the TeDUB web site
where tutorials and examples of UML diagrams can also be found. It is
funded by the sixth framework of the European Commission's
Information Society Technologies research programme
(http://www.cordis.lu/ist/).


+04: Improvements Urged for Library Computer Access.

More assistive equipment, trained staff, and consultation with users is
needed if electronic services in public libraries are to be useful to
vision-impaired people, according to a survey by Robert Gordon
University in Aberdeen (http://www.rgu.ac.uk/abs).

Although many respondents thought that electronic information
services improve the lives of vision-impaired people, there was little
reason for people to travel to a library when many services can be
accessed at home using more familiar equipment, the report said.

The respondents, all experienced users of electronic services, said that
providing assistive equipment without trained staff would not
significantly increase use of library services by people with impaired
vision. Respondents also highlighted the need to involve user groups
from the start, and to adhere strictly to technical and accessibility
standards.

The report, compiled by postgraduate student Andrew Lewis, also
recommends further work on a national system for delivering
information electronically.


++News in Brief:

+05: Working Practice: Compliance with employment law, IT training
for people with impaired vision and adapting computers in the
workplace are among issues covered in 'See to IT at work,' a booklet
aimed at employers. Published by the RNIB, it costs 10 pounds:
http://onlineshop.rnib.org.uk .

+06: Game Boy: An accessible interactive adventure game has been
released that can run on Windows, Macintosh, handheld computers and
Linux operating systems. 'Future Boy!', from the Toronto-based firm
General Coffee Company Film Productions, is recommended for ages
13 and up and costs 20 dollars:
http://www.generalcoffee.com/futureboy .

+07: Jaws Six: The latest version of the JAWS screen reader for
Windows, JAWS 6.0, has been released by US-based manufacturer
Freedom Scientific. New features include a built-in DAISY electronic
book reader, a customisable skim-reading tool and remote access
allowing users to connect to a work computer at home and use JAWS
with applications and files. The release coincides with JAWS' tenth
anniversary:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/jaws1 .

+08: TIE-In: The European Training, Implementation, Education and
Support project from the World Wide Web Consortium's Web
Accessibility Initiative has published an update on its work. The WAI-
TIES electronic newsletter may be freely distributed through mailing
lists:
http://www.w3.org/WAI/TIES/update3 .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: J-Say Standard from T and T Consultancy Ltd.

J-Say Standard combines the unparalleled flexibility of JAWS for
Windows with the outstanding voice recognition capabilities of Dragon
Naturally Speaking Preferred.

Imagine being able to:
- Create word processor documents using natural speech;
- Create and process email using your voice;
- Browse the internet using a combination of voice input and keyboard;
- Rapidly move to specific cells within an Excel worksheet;
- Access an interactive help system, manuals and a tutorial;
- Train the speech recognition software to understand your voice, as
well as having speech-based access to all the features of Dragon
software.

J-Say Standard is ideal for any JAWS user wishing to use voice input
as an additional means of computer input. For more information please
contact T&T Consultancy Ltd by telephone on 08452 303015 or email
on:
enquiries@tandt-consultancy.com .

[Sponsored notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: 'Advances In Technology' to Form Major Part of
the World's Largest Conference on Low Vision and Sight Loss

'Advances in technology will form a major part of the Vision 2005
conference, the world's premier event on low vision and sight loss
hosted by RNIB in London this spring. Designers, technology experts,
scientists and academics will gather from across the world to share best
practice in inclusive design and technology for people with sight
problems.

Keynote speakers include inventor and entrepreneur Dr Raymond
Kurzweil.

Vision 2005 takes place at London's Queen Elizabeth II Conference
Centre from Monday 4 to Thursday 7 April 2005. Day delegates can
receive an early bird discount before 17 February. Register or see the
full programme at:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/vision2005 .

[Sponsored Notice Ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+09: European Invitation: Jenny Craven, research associate at the
centre for research in library and information management at
Manchester Metropolitan University (CERLIM -
http://www.cerlim.ac.uk/), writes in to invite readers to participate in a
European Union-funded project to help make web sites more
accessible.

She writes: "Your responses will help to inform the development of the
European Internet Accessibility Observatory project (EIAO -
http://www.cerlim.ac.uk/projects/eiao/). The goal is to contribute to
better e-accessibility for all citizens and to increase the use of standards
for online resources. The project aims to provide ranked lists of
accessible web sites and to develop accessibility issues to enable policy
makers to develop more effective policies, among others."

A questionnaire is available to complete online at
http://www.ico-trg.mmu.ac.uk/eiao.html . For the plain text or Word
version, please email Jenny on: j.craven@mmu.ac.uk . All responses
will remain anonymous.


+10: CMS Response: In our last issue, E-Access Bulletin technician
Nick Apostolidis requested advice on content management systems
(CMS) that work well with the JAWS screenreader. Bart Simons, a
web accessibility specialist at Brussels-based communications
company ASCii (http://www.ascii.be) replies: "Depending on which
kind of CMS you are looking for I might recommend Nucleus
(http://www.nucleuscms.org/). It does not only provide accessible
content but the machinery itself is accessible as well. Of course one is
free to delete or add accessibility features. It is mainly a CMS to create
weblogs but if you take a look at 'sites running nucleus,' you will
notice a variety of sites."

Martin Vickery, corporate brand manager at the NHS Information
Authority also responds to Nick's request: "You may be interested to
know we have just relaunched the website for the NHS National
Programme for IT (NPfIT - http://www.npfit.nhs.uk) using [the open
source CMS] Plone. The site was constructed by my team in less than
six weeks without any prior knowledge of the system but with
experience of working with open source products and Linux servers.

"The benefits of putting this together in-house were: speed of
development; no long procurement process as nothing had to be
purchased; it is highly accessible, although any CMS is reliant on the
accuracy of content added by authors; it complies with XHTML, CSS
and WAI; and we provide links to validators on each page for checking
which is risky but assists in debugging the system.

"Based on experience with this product I can certainly recommend
open source working."

[Further suggestions please to inbox@headstar.com]


+11: Third Degree: Vicki Bale, a student at the University of the West
of England in Bristol writes in inviting readers to respond to a
questionnaire she has compiled as part of her dissertation on
accessibility of web sites and software. For details, please email Vicki
at:
vicki@onecomputer.co.uk


+13: Gift Rap: Elaine Ainsworth would like to hear from blind or
vision-impaired internet users for a project she is undertaking on the
market opportunities for Braille cards and gifts sold via the internet. "I
am very interested to hear about types of assistive technology and am
looking into web accessibility issues and would like to hear any
positive or negative experiences users have.

"I am also interested to hear from people who are related to, work with,
care for or are friends with people who are blind or vision-impaired
and whether or not they would consider buying personalised Braille
cards, chocolates with Braille menus, flowers with personalised tags or
any other type of gift - your ideas are welcomed. I can prepare some
specific questions to send to anyone who contacts me if this is
preferable." If you would like to help Elaine, please email:
elaine@sitesolved.com .

[Section Two ends]


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three - Focus
- Colour Contrast.

+14: Readers Move Out of The Shade
by Peter Irons.

A quiet revolution is taking place across the UK.  Day after day, new
people are rejecting the white background on their computer screens
and adjusting the gaudy colour displays on websites. Why? It is
because they find reading screens difficult or tiring, and have realised
that they can reset it to an optimum colour arrangement, according to
their personal needs.

The reading process is akin to any sport: some people find it easier
than others, and this has nothing to do with intelligence. Studying
reading is a bit like studying sport science for eyeballs!

The Eye Science/TintaVision project (http://www.tintavision.com)
started in 1984 because many students found words so difficult when
they had to read or write them, but not when they were discussing
topics verbally. The visual component seemed to be getting in the way.

Whiteboards were being introduced into schools and perfectly rational,
intelligent students started complaining about the colours of the
markers that teachers were using. The colour palette on the
Archimedes- an early desktop computer - soon allowed the first
objective experiments on colour and reading.

In 1998, the foresight of David Laycock, manager at the University of
Westminster's Computer Centre for people with Disabilities
(http://www.wmin.ac.uk/ccpd), led to a study of human computer
interaction focused on access to text. My own team started a
methodical study of the outcomes of changing the background and
foreground colours on the computers that dyslexic students were
getting as part of their Disabled Students Allowance.

In 1999 it started to become clear that people's access to text could be
enhanced by measuring their response to changes in pixel brightness
on a screen. Since then, things have moved a long way. For example, a
person we have seen recently had been told that she needed a yellow
filter because it "helped dyslexic people". She is now using a computer
screen which is a sort of "muddy cyan" in colour, reading three times
as fast and reading for fun. All web sites she views are now displayed
with that background, and she now loves her computer!

Over the past two or three years it has become increasingly accepted
by academic researchers that colour is important in access to text, and
the growth in awareness seems to be almost exponential. In computing
and retinal biology, colour is definable very precisely whereas many
people see it as an "arty" or "fluffy" concept. Most people think that as
long as the background is not "white," it is "colour". This is a bit like
having a counting system that only goes up to two or three.

At a recent London seminar hosted by E-Access Bulletin's sister
publication E-Government Bulletin (http://www.electronic-
government.com/accessibility/), it became clear that the three main
tools to be applied in response to disability legislation, with the
purpose of improving access to the web are user's choice of font size,
background colour, and compatibility with speech-generating software.

The challenge we face now is to raise awareness in the 'accessibility
industry' to a level where precise, measured colour is understood to be
part of creating a level playing field for users.

NOTE: Peter Irons is Technical Director at Tintavision
(http://www.tintavision.com/).

[Section Three ends].



++Section Four - My Story
- Angus MacKinnon.

+15: Fighting Against the Storm.

My story begins after the St. Lucia Blind Welfare Association
(SLBWA) in the Caribbean received 14 reconditioned computers,
equipped with speech output software JAWS, from a charitable
organisation in Europe. The problem was that no one in St. Lucia knew
anything about JAWS. But one person's problem is another person's
opportunity, as I was soon to learn.

My opportunity to go to St. Lucia came when I convinced the
Canadian National Institute for the Blind (CNIB -
http://www.cnib.ca/eng/), and the SLBWA that I was the best
candidate for a posting as an intern from Canada for the CNIB and
Foreign Affairs Canada (http://www.fac-aec.gc.ca/menu-en.asp).

I had never heard of St. Lucia, but so what! I knew this was an
opportunity that I had to grab.

My guide dog Dabney and I landed at Hewanorra Airport on the south
end of the island, where we were met by the director of the SLBWA
and some of his staff. I guess we were quite a sight. After the long
flight and my mobility challenge - of which they had been unaware - I
came wobbling off the plane and through the airport. As I later heard,
their initial reaction was: "What have we got ourselves into?"

Dabney was the first guide dog on the island, so the first couple of
months was spent on orientation. Introducing St Lucians to the concept
of a service animal that went everywhere with me proved interesting -
most dogs in St. Lucia are feral or aggressive guard animals and
receive little attention. But the education went smoothly despite a few
confrontations with business owners and park managers and the staff
and members of the St. Lucia Blind Welfare Association proved to be
great allies.

Once orientation was complete, I began training blind and vision-
impaired people on the use of JAWS. My clients were extremely
varied in age, computing experience, visual ability and other factors.
All of them were eager to learn but some had to overcome their fear of
computers.

As time went on, I took a number of individuals into advanced
computer literacy training and increased the independence of other
trainees. For example Anthony Avril, director of the SLBWA,
progressed from having no typing skills to writing documents on the
computer. This was great for Mr Avril but worried his administrative
assistant. Happily, in spite of Mr Avril's achievements, Angel Louis
still has plenty to keep her busy.

Teaching other people taught me a lot. My first lesson was realising
that my clients did not share the same level of computer literacy I was
used to. To avoid losing my students, I had to organise and simplify
my knowledge into a format that would work for them, a skill I had
garnered from my training as a human resources generalist with a
major interest in training and development.

All around us were constant reminders we were working in a
developing country. While the expected computer lab was actually the
kitchen because it had the fewest leaks and the most reliable electricity
supply, electrical outages were a constant occurrence.

The infrastructure of St Lucia also leaves much to be desired for a
vision-impaired person. Very few of the buildings, for example, are
blind-friendly. The few elevators there are do not have Braille for the
floor buttons. The sidewalks that do exist, mainly in the capital
Castries, are continually changing in height, width, and state of repair
or disrepair. Perhaps the greatest challenge is the storm sewers; open
ditches of every size, depth and width imaginable.

All in all, my five months in St. Lucia were great. I watched the
director of the SLBWA go from not knowing the location of the keys
on the keyboard to receiving and sending his own email. I was able to
help nine vision-impaired students learn the basics of computer-use
and JAWS. My legacy is Magdelane Maxwell, who I trained to use and
understand JAWS: she now continues training others.

These small successes stand in stark contrast to the circumstances of
the great majority of the blind and vision-impaired community on St
Lucia, which numbers over 2,500 - largely a community of the hidden
and the ignored. The cause of sight loss is normally glaucoma but the
outcome is always the same: people will often lose their job and thus
go from being a contributor to being a lost member of society.

Fourteen reconditioned Pentium I computers do not go far. They do
make a difference and offer some hope to people like my former
students Jasmine, Stashia, Tony and others struggling to access a
computer and some basic training to use it. But think for just a moment
of how far and how fast other parts of the world are moving.

Developing countries like St. Lucia are being left further behind. The
blind and vision-impaired citizens of these countries are being dumped
in the storm sewers.

NOTE: Angus MacKinnon is vice president of the Choroideremia
Research Foundation (http://www.choroideremia.org). His personal
web page is at: http://members.shaw.ca/dabneyadfm .

If any other readers have their own true story to tell about an inspiring
trip or episode in their life involving any aspect of the use of access
technologies, please email Mel Poluck on mel@headstar.com .

[Section Four ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Technician - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

