+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 67, JULY 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Special Notice: Techshare 2005 Call for Papers
- 17-18 November, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK.

Techshare 2005 is an international event for professionals interested in
technology and the role it plays for people with sight problems.

Would you like to submit a paper to present? We are looking for
innovative research and case studies highlighting the use of
technology. Presentations need not be technical in content.

Speakers will be offered a reduced attendance rate. To download the
paper submission form or simply register to attend, see:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare
Closing date for papers is 1 August.

[Special Notice ends].


++Issue 67 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Talking Cashpoint Machines In Small-Scale European Tests
- But UK still lags far behind US, Canada, Australia.

02: First Electronic Travel Guide Published This Month
- Travellers to download accessible versions of Lonely Planet range.

03: More Bodies Sign Up To Text Email Newsletter Standard.
- 36 organisations adopt guidelines developed by E-Access Bulletin.

News in Brief:
04: Tickets Please - talking bus stops; 05: Free Browse - WebbIE 3;
06: Caribbean DAISY - Jamaican e-books; 07: Access Survey -
Deafblind concerns.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: E-Books Located - library suggestions; 09: Scan Plan - microfilm
accessibility; 10: Screen Solutions - flexible screen reader; 11: Music
Request - iPod experiences sought;

Section Two: Focus - Geographical Information Systems.
12: On The Map: More and more digital map-based systems and
services are being offered to people online, but they are almost always
inaccessible to vision-impaired people. Mel Poluck reports on possible
solutions to on a growing problem.

Section Four: Analysis - Accessible Information.
13: From Games to Word Processing - The Structure of Inclusion: If
information is structured clearly and consistently from the moment it is
created, blind people can access it alongside sighted people. But more
research is needed into the best structures to use, says Matthew
Atkinson.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: e-Access'05
- 14 September 2005, CBI conference Centre, London.
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess05/

E-Access'05 is a new major national exhibition and conference
examining all the issues surrounding access to new technologies,
information and digital services by all. Speakers include Jonathan
Hassell, BBC New Media; John Williams, founder of internet TV
channel at508.com; and Kevin Carey, vice-chair of RNIB.

Attendance costs just 145 pounds for public sector and 195 pounds for
private sector delegates. Come along and experience what is shaping
up to be the UK's largest ever event focused on access to technology
by all. For more see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess05/ .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Talking Cashpoint Machines In Small-Scale European Tests.

Voice-enabled cashpoint machines are now being tested on a small
scale in the UK, although most high street banks still have no plans to
introduce them, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

This month the Belfast-based Northern Bank and Clydesdale Bank of
Scotland have begun to test Automated Teller Machines (ATMs),
equipped with a headphone socket for customers to receive audio
instructions and feedback on their transactions, in a small number of
locations in Belfast and Glasgow. The tests are scheduled to run for six
months, after which the banks will consider extending the service to
more branches.

"You could argue that a lot of people are being deprived of a basic
right if they don't have access to this kind of service," said a Northern
Bank spokesperson. The bank said it would be monitoring the public
response to the service through informal feedback in its branches, and
by liaising with organisations like the RNIB.

However, most other UK banks show little enthusiasm for following
suit, despite the widespread availability of such systems in the US,
Canada and Australia. "We have no formal plans at this stage," said a
spokesperson for the high street bank Abbey. "If there had been a
strong customer need, we would have come across it in the focus
groups we use," he said.

Other banks were similarly reticent. "We do not have any talking
ATMs and have no current plans to introduce them. However we do
have systems in place to assist our visually impaired customers," a
spokesperson for NatWest told E-Access Bulletin. HBOS, HSBC,
Royal Bank of Scotland and Nationwide offered similar replies. Only
Barclays said it had plans to test accessible machines, but declined to
be drawn on the specific details of its plans.

According to market analyst Retail Banking Research the UK ATM
market is split between three manufacturers: Diebold, NCR and
Wincor Nixdorf. "All of them produce the hardware needed to make
ATMs voice enabled. Some machines would have to be upgraded,
which is expensive, but there's no reason why the banks can't specify
this capability for new machines," a spokesperson told E-Access
Bulletin.

One high street financial institution which declined to be named told E-
Access Bulletin it did already have machines installed with a
headphone socket in the hardware, but it had not enabled the software
and systems needed to make the machines talk due to concerns about
software cost, the potential for vandalism and uncertainties over how to
supply headphones.

The RNIB told E-Access Bulletin this week that failing to provide a
service that vision impaired people can use unaided could be grounds
for action under the Disability Discrimination Act. "Potentially, this
could give rise to a claim of non-compliance," said the institute's legal
adviser Jane Vernon.


+02: First Electronic Travel Guide Published This Month

Accessible electronic versions of printed travel guides are to be
published online for the first time this month by Traveleyes, a holiday
company for both vision-impaired and sighted travellers (
http://www.traveleyes.co.uk/ ).

Users will be able to download accessible Microsoft Word versions of
the market-leading Lonely Planet range of guides, with discussions
underway to offer guides from other publishers. Electronic guides will
not include maps and diagrams.

The first guide to be available from mid-July will be on Andalucia in
Spain. Five more titles will follow in August, on California; Egypt;
Italy; Malta; and Morocco and future guides will cover Australia, the
US and other European countries.

TravelEyes director Amar Latif told E-Access Bulletin the electronic
guides are designed to be downloaded onto personal digital assistants
(PDAs) and other portable electronic devices. Visitors to the
TravelEyes site will be able to request areas for which they would like
a corresponding travel guide; if there is enough demand, an accessible
version will be created, Latif said.


+03: More Bodies Sign Up To Text Email Newsletter Standard.

Some 36 organisations have adopted a set of guidelines designed to
ensure plain text email newsletters are easy to use by people using
special access technologies such as screen readers.

The Text Email Newsletter (TEN) standard
( http://www.headstar.com/ten/ ),
developed by the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, covers issues
including consistency of text layout and headline format, making
newsletters easier to search and navigate. It is intended as an optional
tool for text structure only, complementing existing separate standards
for web pages.

The standard was last month updated to version 2.1, following a
consultation process with all signatories, who include nine UK local
authority signatories; central government bodies, and 11 disability
organisations worldwide. The full list can be seen at:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/TEN-signups.doc .

"It's our duty to be aware of accessibility concerns and this standard
has been developed with those in mind," said Rick Mason from East
Sussex County Council. "We've used it from the first issue of our
[email] newsletter," he said.

"[Our newsletters] are now structured and consistent across subject
areas, which is a great benefit; and more accessible obviously," said
Daniel Champion, web manager at Clackmannanshire Council; the
latest council to sign up. "Unlike other authorities we don't offer an
alternative so all our subscribers are getting the accessible version," he
said.

The TEN standard is free to sign up to and apply and is available in
Portuguese and German.

E-Access Bulletin publishers Headstar are now appealing for
volunteers to form a steering group to oversee TEN's future
developments. Any interested organisations or individuals should
contact: dan@headstar.com .


++News in Brief:

+04: Tickets Please: Bus stops around Bristol were last week fitted
with a device allowing vision impaired travellers to hear the time, bus
stop names, route numbers, destinations and arrival times for eight bus
routes across the UK city. Users point an electronic key fob at the
passenger information display at stops to activate audio information.
"Talking bus stops" were launched by Bristol City Council and RNIB:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/bristol2 .

+05: Free Browse: A new version of 'WebbIE', a free accessible web
browser produced by the School of Informatics at the University of
Manchester, has been released. Features of 'WebbIE 3' include a zoom
button for web pages on Internet Explorer and better handling of more
complex web page views:
http://www.webbie.org.uk/ .

+06: Caribbean DAISY: Jamaica has introduced DAISY audio books
to its libraries for the first time, with 25 titles produced by the
University of the West Indies' Radio Education Unit for the National
Library of Jamaica. Plans are in place to provide libraries across the
Caribbean with DAISY audio books by 2007, in a 3 million dollar
project funded by UNESCO and the Canadian Local Initiative Fund:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/jam1 .

+07: Access Survey: Deafblind people fear they will continue to be
ignored by manufacturers of technology and will be unable to afford
new everyday and special access technologies, according to 'Make
technology work', a new survey from the charity Sense. Devices found
to be most difficult to use were everyday items including remote
controls and mobile phones:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/sense1 .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: QAC Sight Village 2005
- Birmingham, July 19-21, 2005

Ink My Dots and Blog Your Podcast: The latest in cutting edge
technology for people who are blind or partially sighted will be on
show this July at Sight Village in Birmingham. Celebrating its twelfth
year, Queen Alexandra College's major international exhibition is
gearing up for its best show yet.

Show sponsors ViewPlus Technologies will be showcasing their
unique 'Ink My Dots' Braille embosser, developed with Hewlett
Packard. The machine produces Braille and standard print or ink-
enhanced tactile graphics on one document.

Other displays include podcasts; digital radios; accessible mobile
phones; Braille note takers; and ultrasonic and GPS navigation
systems. See:
http://www.qac.ac.uk/sightvillage/ .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: E-Books Located: In response to last issue's request from
Margherita Giordano for accessible versions of the Lord of the Rings
and The Hobbit, David Owen of the UK's National Library For The
Blind suggests the library's Revealweb catalogue service
( http://www.revealweb.org.uk ).

"It holds details of 192,000 books in Braille, large print, audio, Moon
and electronic format from 102 suppliers in the UK. You can check
whether the book you require is available in the format you need and
who can supply it if it is available. It has been designed to permit
independent searching by visually impaired people."
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ]

Rod Carne from Somerset in the UK writes: "With regard to reading
where Braille is not an option, if the pupil has any sight the best
solution is to try the giant size print books produced by the National
Blind Children's Society (NBCS). Books are available in up to print
size N48 on various colour paper. Many of the titles can now be loaned
via the National Library for the Blind (NLB)."

Leigh Myers from Library Services Specialist at the Hillsborough
County Talking Book Library in Tampa, Florida recommends the
Bookshare.org site ( http://www.bookshare.org ). "They offer the
service to non-US residents, but it is limited. Please send an email to
oreilly@bookshare.org." Leigh also suggests reading this fact sheet
from the National Library Service:
http://www.loc.gov/nls/reference/factsheets/etexts.html
which lists many sources for ebooks.

Chris McMillan suggests the following US-based web site to obtain the
books: http://www.fictionwise.com/ebooks/eBook22586.htm .

And finally Tim Culhane of technology company Critical Path in
Ireland writes: "I think the simplest thing is to buy the books in audio
book format. There shouldn't be any problem tracking them down,
given their popularity. They will be more expensive than the printed
books, but if you buy them from Amazon or a US-based online
bookstore you will benefit from the favourable currency exchange."


+09: Scan Plan: In our last issue Mark Pimm, Disability Coordinator at
Birkbeck College, University of London, wrote in with a query about
the accessibility of microfilm. Robert Jaquiss of Louisiana, US
responds: "There are various scanners on the market that claim to be
able to digitize microfilm and microfiche. I would start off trying to
scan the microfilm and then use either Kurzweil or Openbook to do
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) on the images.

"OCR works best when images are sharp. A search on Google gave
several sites that sell equipment and provide conversion services. Use
the terms; 'microfilm scanning' or 'microfilm digitizing.'"

And Dick Myers adds: "The way to get microfilm into text usable by
the blind is to use a photo scanner. These are cheap and fast. Scan the
film into text using your favourite OCR. I use FineReader 4.0 Sprint,
which gives over 95 per cent accuracy. The reason you should use a
photo scanner is that its resolution is much higher than the resolution
of a standard page scanner. You will need this extra high resolution to
handle the extremely small print of the microfilm. I recommend a
Canon photoscanner."
[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com .]


+10: Screen Solutions: John Getz, director of the blind rehabilitation
centre at the US Department of Veterans Affairs, writes in to comment
on 'The Language of Flexibility', our June article on the scripting
language used by the JAWS screen reader software.

"I think it would be important to make sure readers know that, for
much less money, they could have a screen reader that didn't need any
complicated scripts or compilation to work with even more off-the-
shelf software applications than Jaws," he says. "This product is called
Window-Eyes ( http://www.gwmicro.com ) . I use both programs in
order to get the most out of my assistive technology but I realise this is
not possible for many people, so when one screen reader is all you can
afford, I'd recommend your readers try Window-Eyes because of its
simplicity and flexibility."


+11: Music Request: E-Access Bulletin would like to hear from
readers about their experiences using mp3 players, 'iPods' or any
electronic music storage device. Comments, ideas and issues on their
accessibility may be included in a feature on the subject in the next
issue of E-Access Bulletin.
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].

[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: Focus
- Geographical Information Systems.

+12: On The Map
by Mel Poluck.

Geographical Information Systems (GIS or GI) - computer systems
which link data to location information such as a postal address, often
linked to digital maps - can be a powerful means to access information
about an area.

But such systems are not generally accessible to vision-impaired
computer users, delegates heard at last months' seminar 'GIS in the
Public Sector,' hosted by E-Access Bulletin's sister publication E-
Government Bulletin.

Of UK local authorities that present services on their web sites using
GIS, only a handful have made their online GIS services accessible,
with pioneers including the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea
and Medway Council.

Awareness of the issues surrounding accessible GIS is increasing,
according to Roger Longhorn, Director of Info-Dynamics Research
Associates. But he said the problem for councils and others was that
there are few accessible solutions out there.

"There are many ways of presenting maps to visually impaired users,
even if it means describing the map to them over the phone and helping
them with their spatial query by voice," Longhorn said. "It isn't the
authorities who are failing in providing better access to maps and
mapping for visually impaired, but the GIS industry.

"Maybe if enough of us join forces, we can get more attention paid to
the less abled users of information in our society, including that which
is underpinned by GIS and displayed on maps," he said.

One key new development could be the initiation in October this year
of an 18-month project to produce a standard for accessibility for
'events and places shown on the web'.

"We expect to have a quality mark so users know it is valid,"
according to Martin Ford, a GIS consultant and convenor of a working
group for geographic information standards, 'ISO/TC 211' (
http://www.isotc211.org/ ).

The group is currently putting together a programme on 'ubiquitous
geographic information,' which includes use of devices such as mobile
phones in a shopping centre, airports or the home for providing
directions and receiving information. "We have some powerful players
signed up to this," Ford said. A draft programme of work will be drawn
up by September.

Ford has recently also submitted a technical proposal to the European
Committee for Standardization's Information Society Standardization
System (CEN ISSS -
http://fastlink.headstar.com/cen1 ),
covering "Accessibility Metadata for Places and Events," in a bid to
receive funding for further development.

One Geographic Information Specialist working for the UK
government told delegates that the key to attaining GIS accessibility is:
"Awareness, followed by vendor-initiated development. Customers
need to make their needs known to their GIS suppliers," he said.

According to the specialist, the most exciting or promising
development currently in the area of GI accessibility is not a technical
but a "soft" development. "It is the increasing awareness of the need
for and right of people with disabilities to access GIS. The technology
will derive from this."


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four: Analysis
- Accessible Information.

+13: From Games to Word Processing: The Structure of Inclusion
by Matthew Atkinson.

It is 6pm on Sunday 25 July, 2004. Down the corridor you can hear
screams and the all-too-familiar sound of grenades being launched into
the ether. You move towards the room where the sounds seem to be
coming from. Two people are frantically yelling and bashing away at
their computer keyboards. It appears that they are playing some kind of
game against each other, but there is something missing: their monitors
are turned off.

That was the first time a blind person ever played a networked game of
Quake, the seminal first-person-shooter computer game for the sighted.

Over the past two years, I have been co-developing some software that
converts the visual aspects of the Quake interface into speech and other
sounds (see  http://www.agrip.org.uk/). It also allows internet play,
which is something very new for accessible action games.

Improvements planned for the future (such as 3D audio and alternative
user interfaces) will add improvements for both sighted and blind
gamers. The ultimate goal of the project is to provide accessibility not
just as a separate entity, but as an integral part of mainstream software
and the surrounding community. This includes affording vision-
impaired and blind gamers the ability to view their progress online and
create new levels and modifications for the game: all activities that
sighted people have been enjoying for some time.

These are welcome developments, but they are very much the
beginning of a process which will hopefully lead to greater
accessibility being built in to many other forms of digital information.

The Quake work has raised a number of general questions about just
what makes something as complex as a 3D game accessible. Finding
solutions will teach us a lot more about accessibility and its links to the
structure of information in general. Based on the progress made so far,
a number of related areas need to be explored.

For example, an XML-based standard for describing 3D worlds is in
development that could lead to a standard and accessible editor
program being able to create levels for many different games,
applications, design and visualisation programs. XML stands for
eXtensible Markup Language; a customisable text-based tool for
exchanging information in hierarchical layers.

And there is great potential in examining the use of alternative user
interface devices and techniques such as 3D audio in representing
traditionally inaccessible materials such as mathematical equations and
flowcharts. I have begun designing a number of techniques for
generalising the principles used in AudioQuake to these tasks.

These and other similar avenues of research are exciting, and I am
hoping to explore them during my PhD. However, there is a key
element that links the AudioQuake project and these ideas - the
question of "Why?"  It is currently a combination of common sense
and convention that leads us to believe we might get some advantage
from developing using the approaches detailed above, but wouldn't it
be better if we could get some guidance as to the correct approach?

A core issue of the work I hope to embark upon will therefore be the
determination of how to present information in the most accessible
way given its format (a 3D model, flow chart or word-processing
document, for example). This will be achieved through the use of
theory, empirical evidence on how blind and sighted people navigate
information, and a number of existing technologies for the
manipulation of data such as XML.

But what sorts of benefits would such generalised rules, or an
automated system that uses them, provide?

When you consider that in 2003, research carried out by Forrester for
Microsoft discovered that 60 per cent of adults in the US aged 18-64
would benefit from some assistive technology for computer use, the
case makes itself. It is clear it would benefit software developers and
creators of content on the web and in other digital formats to have
better direction on how accessible their system is and how it could be
made more so.

But accessibility is just the start: in almost every walk of life nowadays
we are overwhelmed with information. Wouldn't it be convenient to
have this presented to us in the way we find most intuitive? That is yet
another benefit this research could deliver.

NOTE: Matthew Atkinson is seeking a sponsor for his PhD at the
Research School of Informatics, Loughborough University, to top up a
half-scholarship. Sponsors would gain access to his system and
associated software as it is developed. Any organisation interested
please email matthew@agrip.org.uk .

[Section Four ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technician - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
