+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 71, NOVEMBER 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at
the
end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 71 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: BBC Launches Free Online Web Customisation Resource
- Advice site aimed at people of all abilities.

02: 'Large Gap' Between Electronic Goods Makers and Users
- Partnership approach needed, European conference hears.

03: Irish Charity Opens Centre for Inclusive Technology
- Broad remit from cash machines to digital TV.

04: New Internet Radio Station for Vision-Impaired Listeners
- Lancashire-based service to include talking books.

News in Brief: 05: Awards Open: 240,000 euro research prize; 06: Reading
Aloud: Dolphin Tutor for schools; 07: Deafblind Forum - email list; 08:
Glasgow Guide - audible city guide.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
09: Hostile Features - accessibility complaint; 10: Colour Insight - online
vision tests; 11: Skype's Limits - internet telephony; 12: Podcast News -
book
service.

Section Three: Conference report - UK Presidency eAccessibility conference.
13: Demand for Accessible Supply: Last month's conference hosted by the UK
Presidency of the European Commission heard that member state governments
and technology makers are still not doing enough to meet the needs of all
citizens. Mel Poluck reports.

Section Four: Technology - Web Content Accessibility Guidelines.
14: The Human Touch: Automated accessibility tests for your web pages have
their part to play, but only alongside human checks, says Alastair Campbell.
The key is knowing what tests to do at which stages of web site development.

[Contents ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Win An UltraCane on VIP On Air.

This week and next VIP On Air, the internet radio station for blind people,
is
running a competition to win an UltraCane, the award-winning hi-tech
mobility
device from Sound Foresight.

To win you need to answer a question which will be repeated on the station's
12 - 2 show each day, with all correct respondents being entered into a draw
to
take place on 2 December on the same early afternoon programme.

Try your luck by listening in at:
http://www.viponair.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: BBC Launches Free Online Web Customisation Resource.

A free online resource helping people with disabilities to access the
internet by
customising their computer, mouse and keyboard to their individual needs has
been launched by the BBC.

'My web my way'
(http://www.bbc.co.uk/accessibility/ ),
provides advice in non-technical language on how to use the built-in
accessibility features of the three main computer operating systems Windows,
Apple Macintosh and Linux. The resource also provides information on add-on
assistive technologies.

The service is aimed at people with sensory, motor, and cognitive
disabilities
of all kinds including "those people with minor vision impairments who would
not consider themselves to have a disability," the site says.

"We're finding a wider range of people would benefit. The site is designed
for
anybody that needs an adjustment in their browser," said Jon Gooday, senior
consultant at accessibility charity AbilityNet, which helped the BBC develop
the site based on AbilityNet's own similar online resource 'My computer my
way'
( http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/myway/ ).

As part of a plan for future improvements, the site intends to provide
information in audible format. Feedback from users is encouraged to help
suggest further improvements.


+02: 'Large Gap' Between Electronic Goods Makers and Users.

There is still a "very large gap" between manufacturers of electronic
consumer
goods and the needs of users with disabilities, delegates heard at last
month's
European eAccessibility conference hosted in London by the UK Presidency of
the European Union.

"It is clear manufacturers need partnership advice and help to deliver
requirements," Neil Thomas from the Royal National Institute of the Deaf
(RNID) told the conference (http://fastlink.headstar.com/eur3).

Thomas said that manufacturers, users and standards producers must work
jointly to improve the accessibility of mainstream electronic goods and
services
to combat the frustration experienced by people with a disability when using
everyday devices such as washing machines and mobile phones. There is also a
lack of information on product accessibility to disabled users, he said.

Steve Tyler, Senior Strategic Manager for Digital Technology at RNIB, said
manuals for consumer goods from mobile phones to washing machines must be
provided in accessible alternative formats. This would be "an easy win" for
manufacturers, he said.

The conference covered the accessibility of electronic goods and services
across Europe, setting out an action plan across member states. Countries
will
reconvene in two years' time to discuss progress.


+03: Irish Charity Opens Centre for Inclusive Technology.

A new agency offering technology users advice on accessible products and
services, and bringing them into closer contact with designers and
developers,
has been opened by the National Council for the Blind of Ireland (NCBI).

The NCBI Centre for Inclusive Technology
( CFIT - http://www.cfit.ie/ )
has launched a web site with information on how people with disabilities use
technologies and the problems they face, advice for consumers, and guidance
on the accessibility of web sites and digital formats such as PDF. The
centre's
work will cover a broad range of technologies, from accessible cash
dispensers
to digital TV and the web, its director Dr Mark Magennis told E-Access
Bulletin.

Further initiatives planned by the centre, subject to government funding
being
released, include a two-year project to improve communication between end-
users and developers of products and services. "We hope to set up developer
forums, in a similar way to BrailleNet in France," Magennis said. CFIT also
hopes to win government support for a smaller project that will explore how
blogs for blind people can help strengthen communities, he said.

Later this next month the centre will also learn if it has been successful
in a bid
for funding from the European Commission to develop metadata for digital TV
content, as part of the commission's eContentplus programme
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/eur4 ).


+04: New Internet Radio Station for Visually Impaired Listeners.

Blind internet users have a new source of information and entertainment
following the launch last month of blueIRIS
( http://www.blueIRIS.info ),
a free online radio station for vision-impaired people based in Blackpool,
Lancashire. The service, launched by Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Society for
the Blind, aims to deliver programmes reflecting both local and national
interests.

The blueIRIS team are in negotiations with publishers to provide content for
a
talking books service, with a deal having already been reached to broadcast
the
best-selling Dan Brown novel 'The Da Vinci Code'. A more local flavour will
be provided by the North West Sound Archive, which has donated material on
the history of the Fylde Coast, including content recorded by BBC Radio
Lancashire. At present, up to four hours of material is broadcast daily,
including local news and issues, and a listing service for local events.

Users can access the service with computers running either Microsoft Windows
or Apple Macintosh operating systems, and with a broadband connection. The
blueIRIS service grew out of a pilot project launched earlier this year,
which
was tested by 15 users aged between 20 and 80 years old with varying degrees
of vision and computer literacy.

The majority of the 150,000 pounds needed for the project has been provided
by the Lancashire Digital Development Agency, an organisation funded by the
Northwest Regional Development Agency to promote take-up of broadband.
Other partners in the project include Blackpool Council, Ultralab, Rural
Surround and Interface IT Services.


++News in Brief:

+05: Awards Open: Bids have been invited for a prize of 240,000 euros in the
biennial research and development award for new technologies for the blind
and visually impaired, run by Spanish national blindness organisation ONCE.
Entries must be submitted by 30 June 2006:
http://www.once.es/otros/premios/imasd .

+06: Reading Aloud: A software package aimed at print-impaired
schoolchildren has been released, providing text-to-speech output for
on-screen
information to help children with spelling, reading and writing. The Dolphin
Tutor, from assistive technology company Dolphin, works with Microsoft
applications such as Word, Excel and Internet Explorer:
http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/education/products/tutor.htm .

+07: Deafblind Forum A discussion list on issues relating to accessible
technology for deafblind people has been launched by Western Oregon
University in the US. 'Deafblindtecchies.com' offers an open forum for
technical support and sharing advice on devices. To subscribe, email:
DBTECHIES-subscribe-request@TR.WOU.EDU .

+08: Glasgow Guide: Feedback is sought on a pilot audible city guide to
Glasgow in Scotland, covering selected public buildings, streets and
stations.
The service, from Describe Online with Glasgow City Council, can be accessed
or downloaded over the web, with guides available in all audible formats
including mp3 and over the phone:
http://www.describe-online.com/glasgow/ .

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of
translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille menus,
public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you compliant
with
the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate from large print, audio
tape
or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile Signs
for
toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an express
24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate quotation or for
further information on Freephone number 08000 190 946; Mobile: 07903
996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+09: Hostile Features: Gerald Weichbrodt writes in response to our survey
(October issue) which found low accessibility awareness among technology
suppliers. "The comments regarding accessibility features being offered in a
cloak and dagger fashion really struck a chord. We are told that our
population
is ageing and that visual limitations will be a factor for a larger number
of
people. However, if you try to find a modern telephone sporting a host of
features, usually either the manufacturer has nothing to offer for those of
us
who can't see the display, or they used to have one obscure model with such
features but discontinued it due to lack of interest.

"Probe a little deeper, and you find that the specialised model was never
really
marketed widely. Also, the special model wasn't made available in showrooms,
so nobody could walk in off the street and try it. It would have to be
ordered,
unseen, and probably with a long lead time. How on earth can a product with
accessibility features succeed if it's produced and marketed in such a way?

"If accessible products have a track record like this, then that just sets a
precedent for accessible products not being profitable. Meanwhile, the trend
is
away from controls with direct tactile feedback toward visual menus and
other
blind-hostile interfaces to the point where it just isn't fun to shop for
consumer
gadgetry anymore.

"I eagerly await the day when accessibility becomes a selling point and not
just
an obscure gimmick that nobody takes seriously as a source of market
advantage."
[Responses please to inbox@heastar.com]


+10: Colour Insight: Michael Crossland, Senior Research Optometrist at
Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust in London writes in response
to John Starbuck's request in our last issue for colour vision test sites.
"The
Ishihara colour vision test is widely available, even from Amazon.co.uk:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/col1 .

Web-based colour vision tests should be treated with caution as the tests
are
invalid unless performed under the correct type of lighting and screens may
not
render the colours correctly. The site you link to is also very likely to
infringe
copyright.

"There are many other better colour vision tests available, such as the City
University test and the Farsworth-Munsell tests. The easiest way to have
colour
vision tested efficiently is to ask your local optometrist or university
school of
optometry."
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+11: Skype's Limits: Chris McMillan from Reading in the UK writes in
response to Nick Apostolidis's feature on Skype internet telephony,
published
in our September issue, which said sound quality is far superior to a normal
telephone. "I personally would disagree with this," writes Chris. "Much
depends on the quality of the phone line involved and the person you're
talking
to. I am not a telephone expert, but I find the further one is away from a
large
town, the poorer the quality of the line.

"For international calls, 'computer to computer', it will only work on
another
computer elsewhere in the world if they have true broadband capability, so
the
visually impaired worldwide are not yet able to take advantage of what we
are
now beginning to take for granted. I haven't yet rung up anyone on a
landline
from Skype outside the UK to test how well it works.

"There are improvements that could be made. Skype ought to look seriously at
their font colour for those who use magnification. Sky blue is not the best
colour for the vision impaired, and would be rubbish for anyone who is blue
colourblind."
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+12: Podcast News: Chris McMillan also writes to tell readers about a web
site
that makes audio books available via podcasting, called Librivox:
http://librivox.org/ .
It is an open source service aiming to make all books in the public domain
available for free online in audio format. Volunteers record chapters of
books
in digital format, then catalogue and podcast them. "The web site is a bit
informal still, but I think its aim is similar to the non-profit service
'Bookshare'
(http://www.bookshare.org),
writes Chris.
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]

[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to web
accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site building
and
testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility testing tool
WaiZilla
and the accessibility of the open source forum software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and join
in
the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three - Conference report
- UK Presidency eAccessibility conference.

+13: Demand for Accessible Supply
by Mel Poluck.


"Would a barman want a fifth of his customers not buying drinks?"

This was the question posed by Richard Howitt MEP, president of the All
Party
Disability Intergroup for the European Parliament, to delegates at last
month's
conference on eAccessibility hosted by the UK presidency of the European
Commission
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/eur2 ).

Howitt's point was that a fifth of the population of Europe has a
disability, but
member state governments had yet to take a concerted stand to address their
accessibility needs.

The event centred around the recently published EU Communication on
eAccessibility
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/eur5 ),
which suggests three "policy actions" for member states to focus on:
accessibility requirements in public sector procurement, better use of
existing
legislation and accessibility certification.

But Howitt warned governments of the danger of this voluntary approach. "If
in two years we're going to have another set of studies and a set of
dialogues,
you risk losing the confidence of the European Parliament and the citizens
of
Europe," he said.

"Access to ICTs by people with a disability must be recognised first and
foremost as a rights issue," said Professor Rodolfo Cattani, board member of
the European Disability Forum. "Legislation is the best means to support and
protect the rights of disabled people," he said.

But before legislation can be considered, the importance of accessibility
must
be more firmly grasped by the manufacturers of technology. "Positive
advances
in mainstream technology have come about more by chance than an intention
to meet disabled people's needs. It is still regarded by the ICT industry as
a
side issue," Cattani said.

Delegates heard that by 2030, the over-60 age group will comprise 30 per
cent
of Europeans, further increasing the population of people with a disability.
But
manufacturers continue to ignore the issue, they heard.

"For large manufacturers there will be times when the size of the market
will
not be big enough to make [accessibility] a business priority," James Page,
Manager of Radio Regulations at mobile phone company Nokia UK told
delegates, although he added Nokia would be "foolish" not to consider the
needs of all consumers.

And the view of accessibility as a specialist issue may not be restricted to
the
technology industry, according to IBM's director of accessibility for Europe
and the Middle East, Dr Wilfredo Ferre. "From experience talking to
customers
in the private sector, when you try to convince them to be accessible, their
reaction is 'what is accessibility?' They see it as a niche issue."

The European Commission is set to evaluate the outcome of the proposals laid
out in its Communication in two years' time and will create new legislation
"if
deemed necessary," it says. In the meantime, the answer to increased
understanding of the importance of accessibility and to speed up wider
implementation, according to Ferre, is a partnership approach between
citizens,
industry and government. And for this, he said, "the industry stands ready
to
play its part."

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.

Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.

Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.

For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four - Technology
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines.

+14: The Human Touch
by Alastair Campbell.

The accessibility of a web site can be measured at various stages throughout
its
development, against the international World Wide Web Consortium's Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines
( WCAG - http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG10/ ),
so it helps to know which accessibility issues are best dealt with at which
stage.

The most important stage for accessibility is during template development,
where the general code that will be produced is decided. These templates
form
the foundation from which all the pages on the site will be made, and this
is
where the most WCAG checkpoints are accounted for. Tools such as the
W3C's validator and accessibility tools are useful at this stage, but many
items
still require human checks to see what is appropriate.

The process of integrating accessible templates into a product or system,
such
as a content management system (CMS), can be very difficult. Often there are
times when certain aspects are "hard-coded", so it would involve changing
how
a system works to produce valid and accessible code. Occasionally it is not
possible to replicate templates exactly.

However, it is vital to check at the end of this stage that the templates
have
been integrated successfully. It is best to do a complete accessibility and
code
check on a representative sample of pages, and run automated checks on the
entire site to see if any other errors come up. When templates are used, the
only
errors that occur tend to be replicated across many or all pages.

Once the site has been confirmed as being completely accessible at this
stage,
the only thing that can go wrong now is the content. Automated tools will
check a page for many items, but it is important to understand how much of
each checkpoint an automated tool can realistically check for.

Of the 65 WCAG version 1 checkpoints, there are five checkpoints that can be
fully assessed by an automated process, and which are actually better
assessed
automatically. These are checkpoint 3.2, which checks for valid code;
checkpoint 4.3, which identifies the language of a document; checkpoint 9.1,
which warns against server-side image maps; checkpoint 11.2, which deals
with deprecated HTML elements; and checkpoint 12.4, which checks that
labels are associated with their controls in the code.

Another eight checkpoints can be partially assessed by automated tools.
These
are checkpoint 1.1, where automated tools can check for the existence, but
not
for suitability of alternative text; checkpoint 3.4, where the existence of
non-
relative units can be confirmed, but not whether they make a difference to
display; and checkpoints 6.3 and 9.3, which ensure pages work without
scripts.
Automated tools can check for scripts, but not whether the page works for a
user.

These tools can also help with checkpoint 6.4, which deals with mouse or
keyboard only scripts, but not whether they actually work for people; and
checkpoints 7.4 and 7.5, which deal with automatically refreshing or
redirecting pages. Some of these can be detected with automated tools, but
there are many possible ways that they may escape detection.

Checkpoint 13 checks whether link text such as 'click here' is repeated for
links
to different pages, or if the same page is linked to by different text.
However,
many instances found by checkers do not affect people.

Automated tools can be used at the pre-launch stage to check across many
pages, as user-checks have been performed already. However, some things,
such as relevance of alternative text, will never be machine-checkable.
These
issues account for 13 of the 65 checkpoints. The point is that there are
many
things that cannot be confirmed by an automated process.

Once the templates are tried and tested, and the CMS is in full swing, there
are
several checkpoints that often come up when a site is reviewed. For example,
whether links to the same page have different link text; whether links are
not
separated; or headings are not nested correctly.

These are common examples from our experience of relatively minor
accessibility issues that are often best found by an accessibility testing
tool that
'spiders' a site, checking every page within a specified domain. Content
issues
such as alternative text have to be checked by people, and training the
authors
is the most effective measure.

Many accessibility issues will be identified during the template stage.
Working
to resolve them at this point in the development cycle will prevent more
resource intensive resolution attempts farther down the line. Quality
assurance
and automated tools both play a part in the latter stages of the development
cycle, but more often than not they will identify issues too late for them
to be
resolved satisfactorily.

Formulating a clear strategy, based on knowing where and when to test for
accessibility issues, combined with the right tools, the right training and
a good
quality assurance process, is the key to a successful development project.

NOTE: Alastair Campbell is Technical Director at Nomensa
(http://www.nomensa.com).

[Section Four ends]


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to
subscribe
with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when you are
reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as
they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email
newsletter', and our web site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also
cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

