+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 70, OCTOBER 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Special Notice: e-Democracy '05
- The UK's Largest E-Democracy Conference.
- 9 November 2005, CBI Conference Centre, London
http://www.headstar-events.com/edemocracy/ .

Accessibility will be among topics discussed at e-Democracy '05,
hosted by Headstar, publishers of E-Access Bulletin, with the Hansard
Society. Speakers include Helen Petrie, professor of Computer Science
at the University of York and Sue Mottershead of Age Concern's
Digital Inclusion Steering Group. Set to be the UK's largest ever
dedicated e-democracy conference and exhibition, it will also cover e-
voting, e-campaigning and e-consultation.

Places cost 145 pounds for public, charitable and voluntary sector and
195 pounds for private sector. For more information, see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/edemocracy/

[Special Notice ends].


++Issue 70 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Employers 'Ignorant of Technology Access Issues'
- accessibility conference survey reveals.

02: Blunkett Announces New Disability Agency
- new government body to improve accessibility in the UK.

03: Latest Version of JAWS Compatible With Firefox
- popular screen reader now works with Mozilla browser.

04: European E-Accessibility Communication Is 'Waste of Time'
- RNIB vice-chair criticises accessibility plans.

News in Brief:
05: Digital Guide - Swiss navigational device; 06: PDF Converter -
audible access to files; 07: Moving Experience -screen reader for
portable devices.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: External Input - web site contributor query; 09: Colour Theory -
colour blindness test; 10: Political Debate - parliamentary audio book
views sought.

Section Three: Accessibility - e-Access'05 Survey.
11: Reviving The Wow Factor: A survey of delegates at our recent e-
Access '05 conference found most people do not think employers are
sufficiently aware of accessibility issues. Mel Poluck reports.

Section Four - Europe - EU Communication on Accessibility
12: A Waste of Communication: Kevin Carey on why he feels a new
communication from the European Commission on the future of e-
accessibility is a missed opportunity.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice
- Techshare 2005 Pre-conference workshops
- 16 November 2005, RNIB Conference Centre, Birmingham

There are still a number of half day pre-conference workshop places
available at thisyear's Techshare' the RNIB's flagship event on access
to technology. Workshops are open to everyone, not just Techshare
delegates. Topics include basic web accessibility; Apple VoiceOver
hands-on presented by Mike Shebanek, Senior Product Manager at
Apple US; and creating DAISY talking books.

Workshops cost 85 pounds including a buffet lunch. For those
attending a morning and an afternoon workshop the cost is 150 pounds.
For more information and to book online - and to find out more about
Techshare itself - go to:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Employers 'Ignorant Of Technology Access Issues'.

Employers across the public and private sectors do not know enough
about technologies that could help people with disabilities in the
workplace, according to new research by E-Access Bulletin.

The survey was taken of delegates to the recent e-Access '05
conference (http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess05). Some 76 per
cent of respondents said employers were not up to the mark, with just
one person disagreeing.

The survey also found over half of respondents felt mainstream
technology companies are not doing enough to ensure digital inclusion.
Asked what they could do to ensure accessibility for all, one
respondent replied: "Not enough consultation is being done with
people with disabilities so they can tell the manufacturers what they
want, instead of having to make do with what the manufacturers
produce."

Another said: "There must be a huge array of good practice out there
and it is important to bring that together so that it can be shared to
improve access. This sharing must be free or funded centrally so that it
reaches everyone."

The survey was completed by a total of 62 disabled technology users;
local authority access officers; directors of disability organisations;
librarians; government accessibility advisors; IT helpdesk workers and
other conference delegates.

NOTE: For full survey results see 'Reviving the Wow Factor', Section
Three, this issue.


02: Blunkett Announces New Disability Agency.

A new agency responsible for improving access to services for people
with disabilities is to be set up by the UK government later this year.

The Office for Disability Issues (ODI) will be responsible for initiating
and co-ordinating work on accessibility issues across central
government, but will also link up with bodies such as the Disability
Rights Commission and other campaign groups to promote access to
services in wider society.

The plan was unveiled by Secretary of State for Work and Pensions
David Blunkett during a visit to North America, where he met with
Canadian officials who have had a similar agency up and running since
2001. Plans for ODI were originally sketched out earlier this year in
'Improving the Life Chances of Disabled People', a report from the
Prime Minister's Strategy Unit, and Blunkett's fact-finding trip to
Canada is likely to shape the finer detail of ODI's role and
responsibilities.

Speaking from Ottawa, Caroline Weber, director general for the
Canadian Office for Disability Issues, told E-Access Bulletin that the
Canadian agency has four main responsibilities: co-ordinating work
across government departments, building capacity in communities,
funding, and influencing legislation.

Of these Weber is particularly pleased with the Canadian ODI's record
in work in supporting community groups. "Compared with
government, out in the community there are more people who can
address these issues, there are so many effective NGOs out there," she
said.


+03: Latest Version of JAWS Compatible With Firefox.

The latest version of the leading JAWS screen reader is now
compatible with Mozilla's Firefox, a free web browser that has rapidly
gained in popularity, according to Freedom Scientific, the
manufacturer of JAWS.

Work on making all the functions of Firefox accessible to users of
JAWS version 7.0 is still at an early stage but will be ongoing,
Freedom Scientific said in a statement. "The goal is to make all of the
features and useful tools available in Internet Explorer available for
Firefox as well. You'll be able to use navigation quick keys,
PlaceMarkers, custom labels, lists of HTML elements, and more," the
company said.

Users of JAWS will also be able to access the latest instant messaging
products, MSN Messenger and Yahoo! Messenger. These enable users
to be notified when friends or colleagues are online, exchange files and
messages, and make phone calls using their computers. JAWS version
7.0 is also easier to use on the move, because settings can now be
stored on the flash memory sticks that plug into PCs.

Users wanting to compare the product with earlier versions, or with
other screen readers, can download a free demonstration version at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/jaws2 .


+04: European E-Accessibility Communication Is 'Waste of Time.'

One of Europe's leading experts on accessibility has labelled a new
policy paper from the European Commission "a waste of time".

The 2005 EC Communication on eAccessibility (
http://fastlink.headstar.com/comm1 ), adopted on 13 September, aims
to encourage increased activity in key areas of accessibility across
Europe including procurement; certification schemes and legislation. It
describes the need for member states to work together on a consistent
approach to e-accessibility as "urgent."

However Kevin Carey, vice-chair of RNIB and a member of the EU's
Inclusive Communication Sub-Committee (Incom -
http://fastlink.headstar.com/comm2 ), said this month the
communication "has nothing significant to say about the present. And
apart from a study, it proposes nothing for the future."

Writing in this month's E-Access Bulletin, Carey says the paper is in a
"time warp," as it refers to "new technologies where accessibility must
be considered early" where these technologies in fact had standards
defined for them years ago. Additionally, no mention is made of
interactive TV, radio, games, DVDs or converged media devices that
serve more than one function, he said.

Last week a conference took place in London for stakeholders to
discuss the communication
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/comm3 ).
It was hosted by the RNIB as one of a series of events to mark the
UK's presidency of the EU. The next stage of the work will include
research into progress by member states towards implementing the
communication, ahead of a full-scale review of the project in two
years' time.

NOTE: See 'A Waste of Communication', Section Four, this issue.


++News in Brief:

+05: Digital Guide: A handheld computer for outdoor navigation has
been developed by assistive technology company Bones GmbH with
two Swiss national blindness organisations. The 'Personal assistant for
visually impaired people' (PAVIP) provides audible prompts for
directions, locations of key landmarks and public transport
information:
http://www.bones.ch/english_version/pavip/ .

+06: PDF Converter: Software allowing Adobe PDF documents to be
converted to an audio format has been launched in the US and will be
launched in Europe from next month by Texthelp. 'Lexiflow' works
with Adobe Acrobat [? pdf?] documents, converting them to speech,
and can be used on both Windows and Macintosh platforms:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/pdf1 .

+07: Moving Experience: Screen reader software for Windows-based
personal digital assistants (PDAs) and smartphones has been launched
by Spain-based Code Factory. Mobile Speak Pocket provides access to
all the functionality of mainstream PDAs and supports speech
synthesisers such as Fonix and Acapela in 11 languages:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/factory1 .

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: External Input: Judyth Mermelstein from Quebec in Canada
writes in response to Ron Milliman's question about how to allow a
contributor to add web content to the Kentucky Council of the Blind's
web site. "What seems simplest to me is the use of an old-fashioned
web form," Judyth writes. "One can make a web page which already
contains the header, menus, footer, and design elements one wants on
the new pages.

"One can then place an ordinary text input box in the middle of the
page where the author can type in his new contribution with his
ordinary browser, and without the risk of disturbing the other elements
on the page. There are a number of open source programs that make it
fairly simple.

"An alternative is to provide that page, complete with the input box, as
a plain text file the author can use as a template with any text editor or
word processor he uses. In that case, he would be writing into a copy
of the original file, saving it as text rather than exporting it with an
HTML filter. The author then uploads the page via FTP.

"I would definitely not recommend any method whereby the author
created his pages in Word. Microsoft's idea of HTML/XML is
inelegant and doesn't necessarily comply with W3C standards. Mr
Milliman might want to look at a few hosting sites before
recommending one to his contributor." [Further responses please to
inbox@headstar.com]


+09: Colour Theory: John Starbuck, from the corporate ICT
department at Wakefield Metropolitan District Council, has sent in the
following web link, from Australia, which describes tests for colour
blindness:
http://www.toledo-bend.com/colorblind/Ishihara.html .

His question is - do readers know of a UK equivalent?
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+10: Political Debate: Mary Zaccai from Quadrant Media and
Communications in Cardiff, Wales, writes: "We are currently
evaluating the European Parliament Audio Book, the monthly half-
hour broadcast, freely accessible via the internet to give visually-
impaired people an insight to the workings of the European Parliament.
The following link will provide you with the latest broadcast:
http://www.epaudiobook.com .

Mary would be interested to hear feedback from any E-Access Bulletin
readers who have listened to the broadcast.
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com]

[Section Two ends].


++Section Three - Accessibility
- e-Access'05 Survey.

+11: Reviving The Wow Factor
by Mel Poluck.

New information and communication technologies have the potential
to enhance the lives of people with disabilities in many areas:
employment, entertainment, education and public services.

But a new survey of delegates attending a major conference on access
to technology - e-Access '05, hosted by E-Access Bulletin - found over
half of respondents felt mainstream technology companies are not
doing enough to ensure digital inclusion.

"Anything they do offer seems to be kept very cloak and dagger,"
according to one respondent. "Most assistance would need to be asked
for, rather than offered upfront." Another said: "Not enough
consultation is being done with people with disabilities so they can tell
the manufacturers what they want, instead of having to make do with
what the manufacturers produce".

The survey respondents - who were drawn from all parts of the
accessibility debate, from people with disabilities to mainstream
companies - acknowledged that cost could be a significant hurdle for
technology suppliers and service providers to overcome in ensuring
their products and services were accessible. "The financial impact on
small companies can be very large," one delegate said. Another said:
"Some are and some aren't [making technologies accessible], it still
seems to be a learning process. We feed back our user experience and
work with the suppliers to improve their product."

While many respondents suggested that technology providers should
follow accessibility standards and guidelines as laid out by the
government and the World Wide Web Consortium's Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG), not all believed this would provide a panacea.
"Keep in contact with end users to see how good things really are and
do not just rely on meeting standards," said one. "Keep things simple
and as constant as possible."

Some respondents said companies should make more of accessible IT
products to give them the edge over other companies: "[Make]
accessibility a bigger issue and a selling point in new developments,"
said one. Although others agreed some companies are already doing
this, they said more specialist manufacturers still have a long way to
go: "Some have realised that accessibility is a selling point for
products, others in more graphical orientated [areas], for example
Geographical Information Systems, have little knowledge."

A handful of respondents said companies should be raising awareness
of accessible products through, for example, magazines and electronic
publications since in some cases those implementing and using
accessible technologies simply aren't aware of what is available. One
attendee said companies should be: "informing people of the
developments in non-technological language and visual demonstrations
so that people can make informed decisions about which aspects they
want to use. They should use the best form of media to inform people,
aimed at interested parties."

For companies already producing accessible products, one delegate
suggested they should be: "looking not just at the end product as being
accessible, but the entirety of products they offer. A company might
produce a content management system (CMS) that creates perfectly
accessible web pages, but the CMS itself remains inaccessible,
meaning that a disabled user cannot contribute to the content
publishing process."

The onus to ensure technology does not exclude anyone from the
information age does not only fall on IT manufacturers, but survey
respondents generally felt the law in this area is weak. Over half of all
those who responded to the survey said current UK law is not
sufficient to ensure accessibility for all users regardless of their
ability.

Comments such as "The Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) doesn't
have enough teeth" and "It's a good start, but because it is considered
so grey by companies as to what to do to meet legal obligations, they
are often ignored," highlighted the feeling by 32 out of 62 responses
that the DDA's key provision that providers of goods and services
should make "reasonable adjustments" for accessibility is too woolly.

The importance of case law to test the DDA was highlighted by many
respondents. "The legislation is there, I believe that it is time for people
to start taking companies to court. Once there is case law I believe that
organisations will make more of an effort," said one. And one vision-
impaired delegate said: "Its helpful, but not enough of a deterrent for
companies. Not enough people are using legislation to bring forward
cases. It's too slow and bureaucratic."

On the other hand, of the 18 respondents that said there was indeed
sufficient legislation in place, one said: "the DDA shows that even with
strong legislation to promote inclusion, it may take time for
organisations to change accordingly - what is required is more
application of existing legislation."

And another said: "It is not enforced as it should be and there is a huge
amount of ignorance as to what legal obligations there are vis-à-vis
accessible technology. The internet and web sites suffer particularly in
this regard and the lack of a benchmark legal ruling on accessibility of
web sites is a problem."

In terms of employment and accessible technology, just one respondent
said there is enough awareness among employers about accessible
technology that could assist staff. Of those that disagreed, some
mentioned the need for staff training on the options available: "The
sense is that the disability market is a very hidden market. Any
improvements in this area would need to include disability awareness
training," and another responded: "There is painfully little awareness,
but awareness of the options isn't enough anyway - there needs to be an
incentive to find out and implement systems."

Others mentioned the often-cited cost barrier. "I wonder if some
smaller employers will feel that this is an additional cost that they can
do without."

On a practical note, one suggested: "There must be a huge array of
good practice out there and it is important to bring that together so that
it can be shared to improve access. This sharing must be free or funded
centrally so that it reaches everyone."

First-hand experiences of the workplace from respondents with a
disability drive home a lack of awareness of accessible technologies
available, let alone their lacking implementation: "From personal
experience it is apparent that many employers, even if they have heard
of the technology, have never used it themselves, so do not have a
grasp of what it could mean or how it could be a help".

And another said there is no substitute for showing people at first hand
what access to technology can do to transform people's lives: "I don't
have enough fingers and toes to count the number of times the 'wow
factor' has kicked in when I have shown an employer or work
colleague the software I use to access all areas of the computer. This
can be explained in some way by the few numbers of disabled people
in the workplace. It is always the lived experiences that perpetuate
greater awareness and a proactive approach to disabilities and assistive
technological awareness."

NOTE: The presentations from e-Access '05 can be found online at:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess05 .

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.

Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.

Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.

For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four - Europe
- EU Communication on Accessibility

+12: A Waste Of Communication
by Kevin Carey

At last, the EU Communication on eAccessibility has been published -
but it is little short of disastrous. On behalf of the UK Government, I
have been a member of groups that provided feeder reports for the
document, and I do not suppose there has been a disabled person with
more detailed involvement in the lead up to the communication than
myself (. I say this without pride, as it has largely been a waste of time.

The communication (http://fastlink.headstar.com/comm4) proposes a
set of policy actions that foster e-accessibility. It calls on member
states and stakeholders to support positive actions to make products
and services far more widely available in Europe.

In the Working Paper Annexe the options are clearly set out. The
commission could: do nothing; co-ordinate and promote; or legislate.
Industry wanted the first but did not mind leaning towards the second;
users wanted the third; and so, predictably, the Commission opted for
the second.

The communication then cites an impressive list of simple problems
that have not yet been solved such as incompatibility of text phones,
non-acceptance across Europe of 112 as the single emergency
telephone number; and lack of Europe-wide standards for accessibility.

According to the communication, "most of these problems could,
conceptually, be solved from a technical point of view, but require co-
operation, co-ordination and determination at European level as market
forces alone seem not to have been sufficient to date." But what is
going to change the market failure, and what signs have we ever seen
of determination?

The next paragraph begins: "In the near future, examples of new
technologies where accessibility aspects must be considered early
include digital television, third generation mobile telephones, and
broadband communication". I had to read this many times because I
couldn't believe it was serious.

Officials have since explained that these technologies will soon
become widespread enough to present problems, but the standards for
all these were defined years ago! Indeed, the standards for 4G phones,
high definition television, the next iteration of the internet and many
other technologies are already complete. Further, there is no mention
of interactive television, radio, games, DVDs and converged media. In
fact, the whole concept of convergence between media is ignored.

The communication proposes three allegedly new solutions:
accessibility requirements in public procurement, accessibility
certification, and better use of existing legislation.

The first of these is very popular with disability groups, if not the
commission. The commission has not been pushing for joint standards,
and a move towards accessible accessibility certification could,
perversely, impose burdens on the accessibility sector rather than the
generic market. There is also a call for an EU web accessibility label
which isn't a bad idea if it is granted after manual rather than
automated testing.

So what conclusions can we draw from this? First, that this
communication is obsessed with legacy issues and has nothing
significant to say about the present, let alone the future. Secondly, in
spite of its rhetoric, the commission is honest in rating the interests of
industry above those of disabled people. Thirdly, it proposes to do
nothing significant in this area. Finally, apart from a study it proposes
nothing for the future.

This only leaves one viable option. Rather than bitching any further,
we need to work towards establishing a common, platform neutral,
regulatory framework for accessibility that can drive standards. This in
turn can create a market in accessible goods and services. This will be
a long haul because, ultimately, this means establishing a generic right
to information; but if we sort this out we won't need a campaign for
each emerging technology.

[Section Four ends]


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

