+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 69, SEPTEMBER 2005.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Sponsored Notice: The Xerox Copier Assistant
- Digital Copying Made Accessible.

The new Xerox Copier Assistant - available from your local Xerox
representative from 1 October - makes it easier for people who are
visually impaired, blind or have limited dexterity to operate a Xerox
digital copier without assistance from others.

The system provides an alternative to commonly-found touch screen
controls which can be a barrier to many people with disabilities. An
enlarged on-screen user interface, keyboard navigation buttons
including tab, arrow and function keys assist usability as does the text-
to-speech software, which talks the user through the copying steps,
including advanced features such as collating.

A range of adaptive technology solutions may be used with the Xerox
Copier Assistant to further broaden accessibility such as touch-
sensitive keyboards, high visibility keyboards, foot pedal and
ergonomic mouse variants.
[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Issue 69 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Football Clubs to Test Audio Description
- first co-ordinated effort begins.

02: Minister Announces Support for Digital TV Switchover
- but RNIB and Ofcom consumer panel want more.

03: Accesskeys Needs Standards, Report Finds
- how to boost take-up of underused navigation tool.

04: Online Educational Games for Children Launch
- free games for young learners.


News in Brief:
05: Location, Location - GPS forum launch; 06: Legislation Call -
European a-accessibility communication; 07: Job Offer - job centre
DVD.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Half-Baked - kitchen conundrum; 09: Portal Access - accessibility
question; 10: Tune In - mp3 player advice sought; 11: Contributor
Query - web additions; 12: Online Schedule - radio and TV listings;
13: Library News - Revealweb correction.

Section Three - Technology - Skype.
14: Access to a World of Free Voice Calls: Using the internet to make
phone calls could be the start of a revolution in voice communication.
Until recently, making a phone call online was not a practical
possibility for most people, but the arrival of services such as Skype is
set to change all that. But how accessible is it? Nick Apostolidis
investigates

Section Four - Technology Focus - Mp3 Players Part II.
15: Getting Them Talking: With many mp3 players of varying
accessibility now on the market, Mel Poluck reports on what is
available and what can make the players that need it more accessible.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: e-Democracy '05
- The UK's Largest E-Democracy Conference.
- 9 November 2005, CBI Conference Centre, London
http://www.headstar-events.com/edemocracy/

Accessibility will be among topics discussed at e-Democracy '05,
hosted by Headstar, publishers of E-Access Bulletin, VoxPolitics and
the Hansard Society. Speakers include Helen Petrie, professor of
Human Computer Interaction at University College London and Sue
Mottershead of Age Concern's Digital Inclusion Steering Group who
will sit on the panel of a workshop on the digital divide. Set to be the
UK's largest ever dedicated e-democracy conference and exhibition,
with 200 delegates and one of the strongest speaker line-ups ever
assembled, it will also cover e-voting, e-campaigning and e-
consultation; and will include interactive workshops.

Places cost 145 pounds for public, charitable and voluntary sector and
195 pounds for private sector. For more information, see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/edemocracy/

For sponsorship opportunities, please email Claire Clinton on
claire@headstar.com .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Football Clubs to Test Audio Description

As the new football season gets into its stride, a co-ordinated effort has
begun to provide vision-impaired fans with wireless audio description
in more stadiums, including those of lower league clubs.

Coca Cola league clubs Brighton and Hove Albion, Bristol City,
Cardiff City, Doncaster Rovers, Huddersfield Town, Swansea City and
Nationwide Conference side Halifax Town are to test such services, E-
Access Bulletin has learned. The clubs, working in partnership with the
RNIB, aim to have the equipment installed and volunteer
commentators in place by the end of the year.

At present, the quality of audio description services is patchy, if it is
provided at all. In many cases, only a small number of headsets are
available, particularly for away fans, and only at restricted locations in
the stadium, which often means that families and groups of friends
have to split up. Wireless technology can deliver the service to all seats
in the ground.

Where no audio description services are provided many vision-
impaired fans are forced to rely on radio commentary, but this can be
frustrating. "The trouble with radio commentary is the regular
interruptions while reports come in from other matches, other sports, or
even traffic updates," said Eleanor Ellison of the RNIB. According to
Ellison, most Premiership clubs now provide some form of audio
description service, but the RNIB is keen to see all of them install the
latest wireless equipment.

With the surge of interest in cricket following England's victory over
Australia in the Ashes, the RNIB is hopeful that at least some cricket
grounds will follow suit. "We've had discussions with the people at
Lords, the Oval and Sussex Cricket Club," said Ellison. Later this year,
the institute will partner with the BBC to put together a team of
volunteer commentators for all the sports venues testing the
technology.

+02: Minister Announces Support for Digital TV Switchover

The RNIB and broadcasting regulator Ofcom have called for more
detail from the government about support for blind TV users during the
national switchover from analogue to digital television.

Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, Tessa Jowell outlined
the decision during a keynote speech she made to the audience of the
Royal Television Society convention last week.

"We propose to offer some additional support to those who are
registered blind so they can benefit from the audio description facilities
provided by digital technology," Jowell said.

While the exact nature of the support has not yet been outlined, it will
be provided to households where one person is blind but it is unclear
whether the support will come in the form of financial or practical
assistance.

"The panel is unhappy about the practical support measures [for]
socially excluded people including blind and partially sighted people.
We need more detailed discussions with government," said Georgia
Klein, Policy Manager of the independent Ofcom Consumer Panel
( www.ofcomconsumerpanel.org.uk ).

Additionally, partially sighted TV users were not mentioned in the
address and the RNIB are asking the government to extend this support
to partially sighted users, according to RNIB Head of Broadcasting,
Leen Petrie.

The switchover, to take place between 2008 and 2012, means analogue
television will switched off and all programmes will be broadcast
digitally. A free '0800' number will be provided for customers with a
disability.

NOTE: See also 'A Solid Start,' Issue 51, March 2004.

+03: Accesskeys Needs Standards, Report Finds

A lack of standards have caused low awareness and take-up of
accesskeys, the alternative form of web navigation, according to a
report on accesskeys, published this month.

Accesskeys are used by people unable to use a mouse or those who
want to increase efficiency in navigating common links in web sites.

"There is a present lack of standardisation, for both how to assign
accesskeys and how they should be represented. Consequently
awareness of accesskeys is limited," Pete Ward, author of the paper
told E-Access Bulletin. "The lack of standardisation or guidelines for
how they should be implemented decreases the benefits which
accesskeys provide," Ward said.

Ward also found there are potential clashes between built-in shortcuts,
for both browsers and user agents, and keys selected to be accesskeys.
"The number of available keys which may be assigned as an accesskey
without causing a clash is very low," Ward said.

"Many web authors, on account of the difficulties associated with
implementing them, will choose not to utilise them. Standardisation or
guidelines will encourage web developers to use accesskeys."
Ward, who also tested a proposed standard with intended accesskeys
users wrote the paper for his Masters Degree project at University
College London, with support from consultancy The Usability
Company.
( http://www.theusabilitycompany.com/ ).

+04: Online Educational Games for Children Launch

A set of free online educational games for vision-impaired children
was launched this week.

The three games: 'Typer,' to help players learn to type on a QWERTY
keyboard; 'ABC,' to help players learn the English alphabet and
'Numbers Stuff,' for players to learn basic maths, can be downloaded
from the VIP Games Zone site
( http://www.vipgameszone.com/ ).

"All programs will have the same interface; this way, children will not
need to learn a new interface for each program," said developers Alina
and Igor Khmelevtsov of Israel-based VIP Games Zone. All games
have an audible menu and 'speak' actions so users do not have to use a
screen reader. Features such as main menu items and tasks are
displayed on-screen to allow sighted family and friends to help the
vision-impaired child operate games initially.

Each game allows the child to send their score to a scoreboard on
vipgameszone.com or kids.vipgameszone.com where they can check
their position against other players.

The Khmelevtsovs sought views from parents and teachers to feed in to
the development of the games via a questionnaire on their web site.
Around 150 replies from parents showed there was a need for online
educational games on various subjects.

"We plan to create mailing list for parents to discuss our programs and
our future projects. We hope this will help us to improve our
programmes for blind children, making these programs more
accessible."

The pair has designed around 100 educational programs for Ukrainian
schools and have developed a computer training method for children.
They previously released accessible online game Super Football and
strategy game Galaxy Ranger, among others.


++News in Brief:

+05: Location Location: A discussion list on mainstream Global
Positioning System (GPS) navigation technology and its accessibility
to users with a vision impairment has been launched by James Odell.
To subscribe to the list, send a blank e-mail to:
mainstream-gps-request@freelists.org
with the word 'subscribe' in the subject line, or visit:
http://www.freelists.org/list/mainstream-gps

+06: Legislation Call: The European Disability Forum has called on
the European Commission (EC) to draw up legislation on accessibility
for people with a disability in all areas including technology, following
a communication on e-accessibility presented last week by the EC.
Coordinated by European member states and the technology industry,
the aim is to increase accessibility through common standards.
http://www.edf-feph.org/en/news/press.htm

+07: Job Offer: The Department of Work and Pensions has launched a
DVD to promote Jobcentre Plus services to people with a disability or
health problems. 'We can help' follows one character as she goes from
her first interview at a Jobcentre through to employment. Copies are
free from disability employment advisers at Jobcentre Plus offices:
http://www.dwp.gov.uk/mediacentre/pressreleases/2005/sep/empl13-
020905.asp

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Techshare 2005
- Early Bird Rate to 1 October
- 17-18 November, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK.

Techshare 2005 is an international event for professionals interested in
technology and the role it plays for people with sight problems. The
conference will take place on 17 and 18 November with pre-
conference workshops - newly announced - on the 16 November. It
will be held at the Jury's Inn, Birmingham.

This conference is aimed at professionals who work in the field of
sight loss or have an interest in technology. Packed with presentations
and workshops, Techshare is a fantastic opportunity to meet with
experts and other professionals in your field.

To register visit:
http://www.techshare.org.uk .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Half-Baked: Ralph Hindle from Bristol, UK writes: "My wife
Frances is registered blind and her kitchen is a workplace. Recently we
have had to replace old kitchen appliances. Many new appliances such
as ovens are full of digital technology which rules out their use by
blind people. One oven would have been preferred by us but it had
digital controls that Frances would not have been able to use. As a
minimum, I would have expected that the digital output signals be
available for conversion to speech [in which case] it might have been
possible to obtain a better working situation in our kitchen for Frances.

"Is anyone monitoring new areas of exclusion of people with
disabilities by the use of digital technology?"
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+09: Portal Access: Jeanne Hart-Convery, a web developer at the
Administrative Office of the Courts' Internet Services at the New
Jersey Judiciary in the US, writes to ask about ensuring their intranet is
accessible to all: "We're currently working on the portal system for our
intranet. I want to make sure that if we use this online portal for our
external site
http://www.njcourtsonline.com
it will be accessible to everyone. I'm doing research in advance to
make sure. Are there any known issues with the IBM WebSpere Portal
and accessibility?"
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+10: Tune In: Colin Phelan from Chiswick in London writes in about
the feature on accessible MP3 players published last issue: "I receive
your monthly access bulletin and would like to thank you for all the
information it has provided me. In the August article on mp3 players, it
spoke about the NOMAD and the iPod shuffle. It is useful to know that
the iPod shuffle is accessible as I was not aware of this. I would like a
unit with a bigger memory and would ask what is the NOMAD?"
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+11: Contributor Query: Ron Milliman from Bowling Green,
Kentucky in the US writes: "I am the web master for the Kentucky
Council of the Blind's web site:
http://www.kentucky-acb.org .
I would like to be able to allow another contributor to add web content
who is not familiar with HTML or any of the programs such as Front
Page or any other similar web design programs. We would like him to
be able to use a program such as MS Word to add content and to be
able to post his contributions to the site without messing up the header
look of the site and without getting into other areas of the site.

"How can this be accomplished? Many other web masters with limited
knowledge probably have this same problem and question. Your
solution to this problem will be greatly appreciated!"
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+12: Online Schedule: Ian Watt, web site and intranet manager at the
Office of the Chief Executive, Aberdeen City Council writes in to add
to a contribution from Jim Taylor in the August issue, who wrote to tell
readers about a source for BBC7 digital radio programme listings. "I
was going to suggest this site for all digital TV and radio stations:
http://www.bleb.org/tv/?all
which allows XML feeds of all listings, which can be manipulated in
any way, but realised that BBC7 is not covered. Maybe the site is of
use to some of your subscribers, anyway?"
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


+13: Library News: In the Inbox of the July issue, in a contribution
entitled 'E-Books Located,' we described Revealweb as a service of
the National Library for the Blind (NLB). Campaigns Officer at the
RNIB in Northern Ireland David Mann writes: "Revealweb was
developed and is now managed jointly by RNIB and NLB, initially
under the auspices of the Share The Vision Project. Also, David Owen,
described as being of NLB, is in fact Executive Director of Share The
Vision."

[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three - Technology
- Skype.

+14: Access to a World of Free Voice Calls
by Nick Apostolidis.

This month, the online auction giant eBay paid 2.6 billion dollars
worth of cash and stock for a relatively small Swedish company which
had developed a single piece of software, but a revolutionary one:
Skype.

Skype
( http://www.skype.com )
is a messaging application that allows you to talk to other Skype users
worldwide over the internet for free. You can also exchange instant
messages, swap files including documents, pictures or music, and call
any ordinary telephone number in any part of the world at very low
rates.

The system was developed by two entrepreneurs who had previously
developed the peer-to-peer file-sharing programme Kazaa, and in two
years had acquired some 54 million users - a growth-rate of 150,000
users per day.

The price paid for the company - which according to some reports
could rise even further depending on performance - might seem
somewhat dizzy to the uninitiated. But eBay and many other internet
portals see online voice communication as a key part of all future
communication online, and the glue for future online communities.

Skype uses VoIP (Voice over IP) technology to encode, encrypt and
transmit the sound of the voice to be decoded at the other end and
reproduced in near CD-quality sound. It is not only reliable but also
very secure, as it is not possible for someone to listen in to your
conversation.

Skype offers its main functionality - calls between Skype users - for
free, and the company has said these will always be free. They do
charge for some enhanced services however, such as 'SkypeOut',
which allows users to call ordinary telephones anywhere in the world
over the internet. Sound quality is far superior to a normal telephone.

'SkypeIn' is another premium service (costing 30 euros a year) that
allows users to register a phone number with Skype that anyone can
then call. If you are online when they call, you can receive it, otherwise
it diverts to Skype Voicemail.

For blind people, Skype offers many potential benefits beyond the
obvious ones of free or cheap voice calls. For one thing, it has fairly
good compatibility with the main types of screen reader including
JAWS and WindowEyes.

There are improvements that could be made, and screen reader
developers have been talking to Skype about how to improve future
versions for accessibility, including better use of MSAA (Microsoft
Active Accessibility) - the system used by Windows to communicate
effectively with screen readers and other assistive technologies. But
nevertheless it is already mostly accessible.

There are other accessible features too. You can assign hotkeys for
answering, holding, resuming or ending a call. You can access the
menu bar and most of the program functions using keyboard
procedures.

However, navigating lists like your missed call list or the list of users
that are currently online use non-standard Windows controls, with no
information currently passed through to screen readers using MSAA.

There are also accessibility problems with the chat part of the program;
the online Skype directory; and Skype Voicemail, which has point and
click functionality without many hotkeys.

On the other hand the Skype Store - the part of its web site where
services are bought - and the Skype web site in general is very well
designed for screen reader access.

Page layouts are easy to understand and navigate with a minimum of
keystrokes. When you use the Skype Store, the web forms are coded
correctly, with labels for each of the controls, and the HTML is written
in such a way that the screen reader can interpret it correctly. In the
community section of the web site, there also is a message board which
is also very accessible, unlike many others to be found on major sites.

As Skype continues to develop - and with eBay's billions behind it,
one would assume it will do so rapidly - new services will be added
such as call forwarding. We must hope that the Skype interface
continues to improve so better access is provided using standard
Windows controls, a better structured hierarchy and a more usable
design.

As the popularity of Skype continues to skyrocket, it is also to be
expected that a clutch of rivals such as Google's Google Talk
(http://www.google.com/talk/) will attempt to steal its thunder. Screen
reader developers and users will need to keep an eye on all these
systems as well: Google Talk for example is not yet usable at all from
the keyboard.

Skype must now set the accessibility standard at a high level: and then
hopefully the others will follow.

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four - Technology Focus
- MP3 Players Part II

+15: Getting Them Talking
by Mel Poluck

Having an mp3 player can open the gates to a wealth of audio content,
from music to audio books. But not all players are designed with
vision-impaired people in mind, and many small or specialist
developers have taken up the challenge to make mp3 players accessible
to vision-impaired users.

Work is now underway, for example, on text-to-speech firmware, or
instantly upgradeable hardware, for players from global digital
entertainment company Archos
( http://www.archos.com/ ),
which will allow vision-impaired users to independently navigate
menus and features.

The firmware, called Rockbox
( http://www.rockbox.org ),
developed as an open source project in Sweden and Germany, comes
from US-based software company Red Chair
(http://www.redchairsoftware.com/ )
and will soon be compatible with the Archos iRiver H and IHP series,
which cost 200 to 250 pounds.

"It's still in development, and that's why it's not as stable or
feature-rich
as it might be. I'd describe it as a late-stage beta, with some bugs still
to be ironed out and some features still to be added," Aman Singer, a
keen blind mp3 user from Canada told E-Access Bulletin.

Many models of the Archos line compatible with Rockbox, are
relatively old so users often resort to finding them on auction sites.
Rockbox has a dedicated page for blind users on its web site:
http://www.rockbox.org/twiki/bin/view/Main/BlindUsersIndex .

"The iRiver series of players [from Archos] have lots of advantages,"
said Brian Hartgen, Technical Consultant at TandT Consultancy. "The
greatest advantage is the volume of data these players can
accommodate, their ease of use from a file transfer perspective, and the
fact that you can use them as a portable hard disk to transfer other file
types to and from your home computer, which I have found to be very
useful."

The volume of data a player can store can be a key deciding factor
when choosing a player. And while Apple Macintosh's iPod Shuffle is
one of the most accessible players on the market, its disadvantage is its
lack of storage capacity compared to other models.

"Despite one gigabyte being the maximum storage capacity however,
this will hold about 9 or 10 books in high quality audio," Hartgen said
about the player.

As a point of comparison, some Archos players can be upgraded to
hold six times the amount of data held on the iPod. The iRiver series,
offers 20 to 40 times the storage space of players such as the MuVo,
from US-based company Creative Technology
(http://www.creative.com/products/welcome.asp?category=213&subca
tegory=215& ).

But Archos range devices will not play books from popular
publications download site Audible,
( www.audible.com ),
which the iPod does and in Europe at least, the player does not support
the online mp3 music download service Napster To Go
(http://www.napster.com/ntg.html ).

"[US software company] Red Chair
( http://www.redchairsoftware.com/ )
has done a deal with Audible so that you can just [transfer] Audible
files to the Shuffle," Saqib Shaikh, Business analyst at Vodafone UK
said. "And it's completely accessible. You don't need to install iTunes
and I recommend not installing it since it stops windows from
representing it as a drive," he said.

There is a wide choice of software to make the iPod range more
accessible. For screen reader users, there is Hartgen's accessible scripts
for iPod software iTunes, launched last month; Window-Eyes' set files,
which can be used without a screen reader; and the Anapod Explorer
from Red Chair.

But these solutions are not without their drawbacks. "While you can
transfer books using Anapod without problem to the iPod shuffle,"
Hartgen said, "experience has demonstrated from various sources that
the position within an Audible book is not retained when it is on the
shuffle, whereas it is if the books are transferred using iTunes"

And there is yet more work going on to make the iPod accessible.
"There is another program called All-Tunes
( http://wwwx.cs.unc.edu/~gb/cgi-bin/sliki/AllTunes )
developed by a group of students from the University of North
Carolina in the US. This seems like a project to see if iTunes could be
made accessible to screen reader users, and I have not personally had a
lot of success using it," said Hartgen, who has recently set up an email
discussion list on mp3 accessibility.

Much progress has been made to make mp3 devices accessible to
vision-impaired users. Currently though, weighing up the accessibility
pros and cons of a device is still the job of the user.

NOTE: Brian Hartgen will be presenting a paper on accessible portable
media players at RNIB conference Techshare
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/xpedio/groups/public/documents/code/public_
rnib004057.hcsp )
in Birmingham in November.

[Section Four ends]


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2005 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technician - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

