
E-Access Bulletin, December 2016: issue 185
Headstar <eaccess@lists.headstar.com>
To	nfreear@yahoo.co.uk Today at 10:35
---


++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 185, December 2016.

Produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up page below:
http://eab.li/4b .

Please email questions, comments, article ideas and news leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 185 contents.

Section One: News.
01: Inaccessible websites dent business profits, as online shoppers
‘click away’.
- New research reveals that disabled shoppers won’t return to problem
sites.

02: Video games without the visuals for blind gamers.
- Kickstarter boost spawns six new audio games.

03: Google Maps begins listing venue accessibility information.
- Wheelchair-friendly location data collected by Google’s ‘Local
Guides’.


News in Brief: 04: Assisting Vision – Digital devices preferred; 05: App
Spectacular – BeSpecular answers info requests; 06: Home Help – IT
support service.


Section Two: Special report –The NHS Accessible Information Standard.

07: Changing standards.
Earlier this year, the National Health Service introduced the Accessible
Information Standard throughout England, as a way of improving health
information access for patients with impairments. The legally binding
framework requires organisations to provide information in alternative
formats if requested, such as Braille or audio. Reactions have been mixed
since the introduction, with some people claiming that they still have
difficulties acquiring alternative format information. We hear from four
different sources – including e-Access Bulletin readers, NHS England and
the Patient Information Forum – about their experiences of the Standard
and how it can be implemented effectively across England.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Inaccessible websites dent business profits, as online shoppers
‘click away’.

UK businesses are losing out on huge sums of money – potentially
totalling billions of pounds – by failing to make their websites
accessible to users with access needs, new research claims.

Published by disability consultancy Freeney Williams, the Click-Away Pound
(CAP) Survey assessed the “online shopping experience of customers with
disabilities, and the costs to business of ignoring them.”

The report revealed that 71% of disabled customers with access needs will
‘click away’ from a website that they find difficult to use. A key
finding from the survey was that the spending power of these online
shoppers who click away is £11.75 billion – money which is then spent
elsewhere by those same shoppers, on sites that they can access.

Launching the survey results at an event in London to coincide with the
International Day of Persons with Disabilities, Rick Williams – co-author
of the survey and managing director of Freeney Williams – said: “As a
business, why would you design a website that people can’t use? That £12
billion is displaced spending. It’s astonishing – the sheer size of
that number surprised us. Businesses are losing opportunities for that
money.”

The CAP Survey also notes that, “Businesses need to bear in mind that if
a disabled shopper clicks away from their site to one of their competitors,
they show little inclination to return.”

The CAP Survey was initially launched in January (as reported in e-Access
Bulletin issue 176: http://eab.li/48 ) and closed in July, collecting
results from 362 participants. Some estimates from the report are based
around applying trends found in the results to national level, using data
from the Office of National Statistics, among other sources.

While the key messages behind the research will be familiar to many
e-Access Bulletin readers, the findings will likely come as a surprise to
many businesses. The CAP Survey claims that, “Most businesses will be
unaware that they are losing income, because more than 90% of customers who
have difficulty using a site will not contact them.”

In fact, the survey found that over 80% of online shoppers with access
needs will choose to spend their money on websites with the fewest barriers
in place for them, as opposed to the cheapest.

The five most common website problems identified by survey respondents
were: crowded pages; poor link information; filling in forms; moving images
or graphics; and poor legibility, including colour contrast and text
layout.

Screen-readers were found to be the most common type of assistive
technology (AT) used by respondents, with 53% of all respondents using some
form of AT. As the CAP Survey points out, “No matter how sophisticated or
efficient AT might be or how competent its user, unless a website is
designed and developed to take access needs into account, the capacity of
AT to overcome access barriers will always be limited.”

The report finishes by explaining that while the 2016 CAP Survey has
“established a point of departure,” a follow-up survey is also planned
for next year. The 2017 CAP Survey will examine the subject in relation to
specific business sectors, and beyond the UK.

Read the Click-Away Pound Report in full, as a PDF or Word document, at the
CAP website: http://eab.li/49 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/4f .


+02: Video games without the visuals for blind gamers.

A series of five new audio-based video games for blind and visually
impaired users are being designed, after a crowdfunding campaign to support
the project achieved over 150% of its target funding.

The games, including versions of classic arcade title ‘Frogger’ and a
cricket game, will be available on mobile devices, tablet computers and
desktop computers, through the iOS and Andriod operating systems, as well
as Windows PC.

In April 2016, the Audio Game Hub project released a free package of eight
“experimental arcade videogames” that relied on audio, rather than
visuals. Designed primarily for people with sight loss, the games were
fully playable without the need to look at a screen, featuring an option to
turn off the visuals completely. The games – including ‘Archery’,
‘Samurai Tournament’ and ‘Slot Machines’ – proved incredibly
popular with both non-sighted and sighted users, receiving over 33,000
downloads.

Audio Game Hub founder Jarek Beksa told e-Access Bulletin that the idea
came several years ago, when testing equipment at a telecoms company:
“During one of the tests we spoke with a blind user. He told us ‘Nobody
makes games for us.’ Since then, we started thinking about the idea of
creating accessible games, Beksa said.

The team behind Audio Game Hub – based in Auckland, New Zealand – were
soon inundated with requests for more games, so they launched a Kickstarter
crowdfunding campaign in November. People who backed the campaign also
voted on which games the team should develop, chosen from a list of 14.

In just ten days, the campaign had exceeded its goal of 6,000 New Zealand
Dollars (approximately £3,370) by 150%. Most of the money will be spent on
sound production and voice recording for the games, Beksa said.

The five games chosen by people who donated to the campaign were:
‘Frogger’, a version of a 1981 arcade game where the user has to guide
a frog safely across a busy road; ‘Cricket’; ‘Simon + Super Simon’,
a memory game where users remember commands and sequences; ‘Blackjack –
21’, a popular casino card game; and ‘Runner’, where users control a
character running through different terrains.

The new games will be available as in-app purchases through the existing
Audio Game Hub collection, which is free to download.

In addition to the five chosen titles, another game, ‘Whispering
Tunnels’, will be released as a standalone purchasable app. According to
the Kickstarter campaign page, ‘Whispering Tunnels’ is “an audio
role-playing game specially tailored for the visually impaired”. Players
must solve puzzles, avoid traps, battle monsters and engage in dialogues to
escape from a tunnel.

Audio Game Hub was created in collaboration with the Gamification Lab of
the Leuphana University of Lüneburg, Germany, and the School of Computer
and Mathematical Sciences of Auckland University of Technology, New
Zealand. The project is also sponsored by Auckland University and the
AbleGamers Charity.

Read more about the project and download the original eight games for free
at the Audio Game Hub website:
http://eab.li/45 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/4e .


+03: Google Maps begins listing venue accessibility information.

Google Maps app now tells users whether some locations are
wheelchair-accessible, thanks to the efforts of a Google employee in his
spare time.

Rio Akasaka, a product manager for cloud storage service Google Drive,
undertook the project using his ‘20% time’ – a well-known Google
employee policy that allows staff to spend 20 per cent of their time
working on projects unrelated to their role at the company.

In an interview with the ‘Business Insider’ news website earlier this
month about the project, Akasaka explained that he led a small team of
Google employees, who worked to add the accessibility information to
certain venues in the mobile app version of Google Maps. The data was
collected by Google’s ‘Local Guides’, a community of millions of
users who volunteer to answer questions about places they visit when using
Google Maps. This information helps Google improve its maps and provide
more detailed information to other users.

Earlier this year, Google began asking its Local Guides accessibility
questions about venues they were visiting. Millions of responses were
collected, enabling Google to begin adding this information to map venues.

When users click on a venue description in Google Maps to view its
features, the ‘Amenities’ section now lists whether the venue has a
wheelchair-accessible entrance – as long as the information has been
collected and logged.

Akasaka also said in the interview that he believes this information will
benefit other users, as well as those using wheelchairs, such as people
with prams or those who use a cane to walk.

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/4d .


++News in Brief:

+04: Assisting Vision: Digital vision aids, such as a handheld digital
magnifier, are the preferred tools of young people with low vision,
according to new research. ‘Design and Low Vision Aids – a Youth
Perspective’ is published by Thomas Pocklington Trust, the Helen Hamlyn
Centre for Design, VISION 2020 UK and VICTA, and explores how
12-18-year-olds with low vision use vision aids – such as smartphones,
magnifiers and screen-readers – to increase their independence. Good
design and covertness of vision aids were found to be important to young
people, as was mainstream technology which combines traditional functions
with assistive features.

Read the full report in Word of PDF format at the VISION 2020 website:
http://eab.li/46 .


+05: App Spectacular: An app from a South African technology start-up
company has been helping solve information requests from users with visual
impairments. Users of the BeSpecular app take a photograph of an object
they want information about, and send the picture, with a voice message, to
the BeSpecular community. A sighted user will be forwarded the request,
before replying with the required information, via text or voice message.
Earlier this year, BeSpecular’s CEO, Stephanie Cowper, received an
‘Innovator Recognition Award’ in light of her work on the app at a
Women in ICT Awards event.

Read more and download the app for iOS and Android at the BeSpecular
website:
http://eab.li/47 .


+06: Home Help: Technology access charity AbilityNet is using the Christmas
period to remind people of its free ‘ITCanHelp’ service. Persons with
disabilities and older people can request a home visit from an AbilityNet
volunteer to help them with IT issues, such as installing new software,
choosing equipment and smartphone assistance, or even help with printers,
games and tablets – a useful service for people who may be struggling to
use a new device given to them as a Christmas present.

Read more about ITCanHelp and request a home visit at the AbilityNet
website:
http://eab.li/4a .


[Section One ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust.
E-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for people
with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust
by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.
e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month on The
Early Edition programme. Hear more about the bulletin and upcoming content
appearing in each issue, as we discuss the latest accessible technology
news and readers’ questions with Allan Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts from the RNIB
Connect Radio site. Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via television,
smartphone or radio. Listening details at the following link:
http://eab.li/3e .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website:
http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].


++Section Two: Special report.
- The NHS Accessible Information Standard.

+07: Changing standards.

At the end of July, the National Health Service (NHS) Accessible
Information Standard was implemented throughout England. This means that
any organisation providing NHS care or adult social care is now legally
obliged to provide information in accessible formats, so that people with a
disability or impairment (those who may not be able to access or read text
and information in the traditional form) have the same access to health
information as any other NHS user.

This includes an obligation for organisations to provide alternative
information formats to meet individuals’ requirements, including Braille,
electronic and audio formats.

The specification of the Accessible Information Standard highlights the
Equality Act 2010 as a legal basis for implementation (alongside a
‘compelling moral and ethical imperative’), and also notes that the
Standard is “unashamedly ambitious” in its overall aim of providing
“clear direction for a dramatic improvement in the ability of the NHS and
adult social care system to meet the information and communication support
needs of disabled people.”

It also notes that applicable organisations have a legal obligation to
follow the standard.

This is clearly a much-needed and positive step forwards in terms of
accessible information, and many people with an impairment have been
waiting years for such a move.

However, e-Access Bulletin has received correspondence from some readers
who have had continued problems and difficulties in obtaining alternative
format information, despite the Standard being in place. Their suggestion
was that the Standard has not been properly or effectively implemented in
all organisations.

In the interest of balance, it is worth noting that implementing such a
Standard is clearly a huge undertaking. Some have argued that teething
troubles are to be expected, while others say that things are simply not
working as they should be. The important thing now, it seems, is for the
Standard to be understood and implemented as widely and effectively as
possible, so that people who need accessible information can receive it as
quickly and smoothly as possible.

To give an overall picture of the current situation, e-Access Bulletin has
collected comments from four different sources: two Bulletin readers who
have encountered difficulties in obtaining accessible information; the
Patient Information Forum (an independent, membership organisation for
people working in healthcare information and support), and NHS England.
These comments, published below, aim to explain the Standard and provide a
view of how well it is currently working, but also – crucially – to
explore what can be done to improve implementation.

- Penny Melville-Brown OBE, Director of Disability Dynamics and e-Access
Bulletin reader:

“Like other organisations providing services to the public, the NHS knows
that some disabled people have extra needs when it comes to communications
and information. The NHS Accessible Information Standard requires
accessible and alternate formats.

“More disabled people should get the healthcare we need – people with
visual or hearing impairments have a higher risk of other long-term
conditions, including dementia. People with alternative information or
communication needs should take the following steps:

“Tell their GP practice manager; ask them to share those needs across the
NHS; make sure their reasonable needs are met – not just what someone
thinks will work; make sure the Standard is applied to all information;
keep on asking – people are still learning; encourage others to ask too.

“Personal struggles with a leading eye hospital and GP practice show that
some organisations need help to understand and change their systems. To get
standard letters, appointment confirmations, surgery consent forms, routine
leaflets, after-care instructions, etc, sent by email without hopelessly
complicated security, I had to escalate requests to chief executive-level.

“One response included asking a blind person to read the bold wording –
showing what still needs to be learned.”

More information on accessible communications can be found and downloaded
at the Disability Dynamics blog:
http://eab.li/42 .

- Brian Gaff, of Kingston upon Thames Talking Newspaper (run by the
Kingston upon Thames Association for the Blind), and e-Access Bulletin
reader:

“One of the most frustrating things we hear about – and encounter –
at the newspaper is lack of knowledge of healthcare and other government
departments, about how it is possible to make their information accessible.

“Many people have asked for things like appointment letters in either
plain text emails or audio. Surely, with access to the raw text that most
government sources must have, this should be a no-brainer.

“Now that the Accessible Information Standard has come into force, we are
meant to be able to tell our GP our information choices, which feeds
through to every part of the NHS and social care that we access – except
it is not working, since everyone thinks it is somebody else’s job, not
theirs.

“Seeing as this is not just an access issue but an independent living one
as well, it seems to me that the Standard has been rolled out with little
or no training to people in the areas who are going to implement it. There
is web training and tests, but a busy department head is unlikely to have
seen any of this.

“So, as far as getting government departments to get on the accessibility
train with the commercial sector, somebody in government is going to have
to bite the bullet and spend some money to train people, or else no matter
how many times the law is broken, nothing will happen.

“I will say, however, that my local GP Practice Manager has tried long
and hard to make this work, but outside of their practice it seems that the
doors are closed right now.

“In terms of solutions, I would say: get a standard of good practice and
get everyone using the same resources. This would hopefully save money and
hopefully get communication about patients’ health working.”

Find out more about the Kingston Upon Thames Talking Newspaper at the
following link:
http://eab.li/4g .

- From NHS England, with a contribution from Dr Clare Mander, Clinical Lead
for Accessible Information at Solent NHS Trust:

“The Standard sets out, for the first time, how all providers of NHS or
adult social care must identify, record, flag, share and meet the
information and communication support needs of people with a disability,
impairment or sensory loss.

“Co-produced with a range of voluntary organisations, and with disabled
people themselves, the Standard has been called a ‘step change’ in
disabled people’s access to healthcare.

“As with any new, national initiative, the speed and effectiveness of
implementation will vary. We are aware of fantastic work going on (for
example, East Lancashire Hospitals NHS Trust has made significant progress
in implementing the Standard) and have seen an increase in requests for
large-print formats and audio, as well as via email, text and British Sign
Language interpreter.

“As Dr Clare Mander, Clinical Lead for Accessible Information at Solent
NHS Trust, explains: ‘We welcomed the opportunity to contribute to the
development and implementation of the national standard. The legal
requirements have galvanised a decade of local developments, which include
qualitative research, service evaluations and innovation projects.
Implementation of the standard across a Community and Mental Health Trust,
with over 100 clinical sites, is no easy task.

‘In 2015, we began a project to develop a tiered model of accessible
information training that was co-produced with patients living with
communication and information needs. Our awareness DVD has now been rolled
out across the Trust, an interactive accessible information learning
platform is in development, and a programme of specialist training has been
piloted with ten services.

‘Through this specialist training, champions were identified and formed a
new accessible information network that will link with our patient leads.
The network aims to facilitate collective intelligence and social learning
to improve accessible information practice across the Trust. We still have
a long way to go, but together we have the opportunities to make a real
difference.’

“We advise anyone experiencing difficulties with receiving accessible
information and/or communication support to follow the relevant complaints
process. The NHS complaints process is explained on the NHS Choices
website, at the following link:
http://eab.li/40 .

“Resources to support implementation are available on the NHS England
website, at the following link:
http://eab.li/41 .

“During January-March 2017, there will be a review of the Standard to
look at the impact it has had and to ensure that it is ‘fit for
purpose’. Anyone wanting to get involved should join the distribution
list, by emailing the following address: england.nhs.participation@nhs.net
.

“Patients can also contact the Customer Contact Centre on the following
phone UK number: 0300 311 22 33.”

- From The Patient Information Forum (PIF), with a contribution from Claire
Murray, Joint Head of Operations:

“To support organisations to implement the Accessible Information
Standard, PIF has launched a free-to-join online discussion group, where
members can ask questions and share their experiences.

“Nearly 500 people have joined the group so far, and discussions have
covered topics such as patient records, service user surveys in alternative
communication formats, consent and ‘flagging’ communication needs.

“The group brings together people from across the NHS and local
authorities, including people with specialist experience in developing
accessible information from voluntary, statutory and commercial
organisations. Through these interactions, the group has also shared useful
resources on developing information in accessible formats, locally
developed policies, and debunking some myths about the Standard.

“Claire Murray, Joint Head of Operations at PIF, says: ‘It’s been
great to be part of bringing together such a diverse group of people around
this important new Standard, to help increase understanding and expertise
in developing truly accessible information.

‘Good information is vital to support people to understand and engage
with their health and health services, and we know people with
communication needs still face significant barriers in accessing this.

‘It’s not just the format of an information resource that affects its
accessibility, and the ultimate judge of the usefulness of any piece of
health information is the patient or service user engaging with it.

‘At PIF we believe that involving users in developing or adapting
accessible information resources is a crucial step to delivering genuinely
accessible information.

‘Implementing the Accessible Information Standard is not just a
box-ticking exercise, it’s a fantastic opportunity for organisations to
learn what really makes health information understandable for their users,
and how best this can be delivered.’”

Join PIF’s ‘Accessible Information Group’ at the following link:
http://eab.li/43 .

Read more about the Accessible Information Standard – including the
specification in Word document format and PDF – at the NHS England
website:
http://eab.li/44 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/4c .


[Section Two ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive e-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://eab.li/4b .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button.

Previous issues of e-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor
when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as ‘taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter’, and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:
Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 185 ends.]



--

This message was sent to nfreear@yahoo.co.uk by eaccess@lists.headstar.com

To forward this message, please do not use the forward button of your
email application, because this message was made specifically for you only.
Instead use the forward page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=forward&uid=8853df643ffa0a489fcaf5869c781942&mid=93>
in our newsletter system.

To change your details and to choose which lists to be subscribed to,
visit your personal preferences page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=preferences&uid=8853df643ffa0a489fcaf5869c781942>

Or you can opt-out completely
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=unsubscribe&uid=8853df643ffa0a489fcaf5869c781942>
from all future mailings.



-- powered by phpList, www.phplist.com --
