++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 176, February 2016.

A Headstar Publication, produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington
Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin, instead of using your email application’s
‘forward’ button. Please encourage others to subscribe by visiting our
sign-up page:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Subscription details are repeated at the end, but for queries, email:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 176 contents.

Section One:
01: Editorial note.


Section Two: News.
02: Survey puts a price on frustrated shoppers ‘clicking away’:
- Research looks at money lost by inaccessible online retailers.

03: Video gaming charity expands its reach by delivering bonus packs:
- Free games and assistive technology given out around the US.

04: UK-wide digital champions network launches, backed by £2 million:
- Home-based digital literacy training offered in new project.


News in Brief: 05: Directive Action – campaign launched; 06: Paralympic
Prep – a glimpse of Tokyo 2020; 07: Tech4Good 2016 – innovation awards
return.


Section Three: special report – How accessible is WordPress?
08: Pressing issues – WordPress powers over 20% of websites, making it
the most widely used content management system in the world, but weaving
accessibility into the sites it produces – and into WordPress itself –
is no easy task. Graham Armfield looks into what’s being done.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: Editorial note.

+01: Welcome back to e-Access Bulletin.
As many readers will now know, the bulletin has been on hiatus since
mid-2015. Initially this was due to publishing logistics, but later that
year, Dan Jellinek, e-Access Bulletin’s founder and editor, passed away
suddenly and unexpectedly. This was, and continues to be, a horrific shock
for everyone who knew Dan and the countless people who appreciated his
work.

Dan was a wonderful, talented, kind individual, who was passionate about
the issues he believed in, as readers of e-Access Bulletin will know.
Though he worked successfully in many areas, he was also a superb
journalist and editor, and contributed a great deal to digital
accessibility at a time when coverage of the sector was still in its
infancy.

Deciding to continue the bulletin without Dan was not an easy task. His
knowledge, abilities and creative flair were present in every issue, and
the thought of continuing the bulletin without him is, frankly, an
intimidating one, as well as incredibly sad on a personal level for me. I
always saw Dan as a friend, as well as a colleague and my editor for a
number of years.

E-Access Bulletin was and always will be Dan’s publication. He poured so
much thought, care and energy into it, and worked extremely hard to keep it
going since its launch in 2000. He did all this because he knew how useful
the bulletin was to people in informing them about accessibility issues. I
can only hope to continue keeping readers informed about those issues, and
hopefully pay tribute to Dan’s great work along the way.

Thanks to the following people for their help and support in relaunching
the bulletin: Gillian Fraser, Roger Clifton, Thomas Pocklington Trust,
Derek Parkinson, John Neame, Kevin Carey, and in particular, Jake Jellinek.
Without Jake’s technical expertise, patience and invaluable assistance at
every turn, it simply wouldn’t have been possible to publish the bulletin
again. Thanks also to all those readers who have already expressed their
support for the bulletin and sadness at the awful news about Dan.

The next issue of e-Access Bulletin will feature a special tribute to Dan
and his work in the e-accessibility sector, with contributions from those
who knew and worked with him.

In the meantime, I hope you enjoy reading e-Access Bulletin again.

Tristan Parker.


[Section One ends].


++Section Two: News.

+02: Survey puts a price on frustrated shoppers ‘clicking away’.

Widespread research will find out how much money UK businesses are losing
by failing to make their websites accessible to users with disabilities.

The Click-Away Pound survey (CAP) asks internet users with disabilities
about their online shopping experiences across a range of sectors,
including banking, supermarkets and travel. Rick Williams, managing
director of disability consultancy Freeney Williams, came up with the idea
after 15 years of assessing and auditing poorly designed websites through
his work.

Williams was inspired to create CAP by the Business Disability Forum’s
Walkaway Pound Report (link to report: http://bit.ly/1PL9p8c ) in 2015,
which found that over 75% of people with disabilities had left a shop or
business because of its poor awareness of disability. He wanted to find out
if these negative shopping experiences were mirrored online.

The CAP survey was co-designed by Williams and Steve Brownlow of ICT
accessibility company Frabjous Day Ltd, and is being supported by a number
of organisations, including the Business Disability Forum, Business
Disability International and the Royal National Institute of Blind People
(RNIB).

Speaking to e-Access Bulletin, Williams claimed that over 70% of websites
his company has assessed have a “significant” commercial and legal risk
due to inaccessibility. Williams said: “There is a law, of course [the
Equality Act 2010], but 20 years of legislation hasn’t really made much
of an impact.”

Williams also explained his motivation for creating the CAP survey:
“Businesses need to understand that they ignore disabled shoppers at the
risk of their bottom line, and those who do make their websites accessible
will get the business. If we can demonstrate to businesses the lost
opportunities in hard cash, then maybe they will feel more inclined to
change.”

Purchasing goods and services online can be a notoriously difficult
experience for shoppers with disabilities, particularly when using
assistive technology such as screen-readers. The transactional sections of
many websites are often not designed to accommodate this technology,
meaning that users can find it difficult or impossible to complete a
purchase through these sites.

Initial research by Freeney Williams before launching the survey found that
over 70% of disabled people regularly encounter inaccessible websites. The
common reaction was to simply ‘click away’ and find a more
user-friendly site, the research shows.

A closing date for the Click-Away Pound survey hasn’t yet been decided,
as Williams is keen to gather as many submissions as possible, but results
will eventually be published a few months after CAP closes.

Williams encourages any online users with disabilities to complete the
survey, which is open now and can be found at the links to the Click-Away
Pound website below. Results are anonymous and it takes around ten minutes
to complete.

Short link to the Click-Away Pound website:
http://bit.ly/1PDOjZs .

Full link to the Click-Away Pound website:
http://www.clickawaypound.com .

Comment on this story, at E-Access Bulletin Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1105 .


+03: Video gaming charity expands its reach by delivering bonus packs.

A gaming charity has begun giving out ‘Expansion Packs’ containing
assistive technology and video games to specialist care homes and
organisations working with individuals with disabilities around the United
States.

The AbleGamers Foundation gives video game fans with disabilities the
chance to play games and connect with others, through what it claims is the
largest community for gamers with disabilities in the world. The Expansion
Packs project is a way of providing games and assistive equipment on a
larger scale, says the charity.

Launched in 2004, AbleGamers has been working with large companies from the
gaming industry (including Electronic Arts and SteelSeries) to create the
packs for distribution across the US. The packs will be tailored to suit
the needs of individuals at each organisation, and AbleGamers will train
staff at each location to set up the gaming equipment and assistive
technology. A ‘troubleshooting’ service will also be offered to solve
any issues after the set-up.

The first Expansion Pack was given to Pediatric Speciality Care in
Pennsylvania, which offers long-term care for children with disabilities.
The second pack will be given to a centre in Boston.

AbleGamers also offers resources and advice. The charity has produced
guidelines for developers on designing accessible video games, and it also
supplies assistive technology grants for gamers with disabilities. An
upcoming portal on the AbleGamers website will provide information for
those caring for someone with a disability, advising on suitable games and
the assistive technology needed to play them.

Read more about the AbleGamers Foundation at the links below.

Short link to the AbleGamers website:
http://bit.ly/1SVI5YS .

Full link to the AbleGamers website:
http://www.ablegamers.com .

Comment on this story, at E-Access Bulletin Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1109 .


+04: UK-wide digital champions network launches, backed by £2 million.

Home-based digital skills training will be given to elderly people and
those with disabilities in a newly launched project.

One Digital is a UK initiative to improve digital literacy around the
country, led by a consortium of six charities and training organisations,
funded through £2 million from grant-giving organisation the Big Lottery
Fund. These partner organisations will work on separate projects, but all
will be involved with training digital champions to pass on their skills.

After plans for the scheme were announced in September last year, One
Digital was launched in Edinburgh earlier this month, and its work is now
underway.

One strand of the funding has gone to skills organisation Digital Unite.
Assistive technology charity AbilityNet and housing association Affinity
Sutton will work in partnership with Digital Unite to build a network of
digital champions.

AbilityNet will support volunteers in becoming champions, who will then
provide help to approximately 1,000 digitally excluded elderly and disabled
people in their homes. Skills being passed on will include sending emails,
using search engines, and online shopping and banking.

Other members of the One Digital consortium include Age UK, Citizens Online
and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations (SCVO).

In a blog post celebrating the launch, programme director and chief
executive of Digital Unite, Emma Weston, wrote: “One Digital is really
profoundly different from digital skills projects that have gone before
it”. Weston went on to highlight the crucial role that digital champions
will play in the project, connecting with some of the 12 million people
around the UK who do not use the internet.

There will also be a One Digital ‘support network’ with resources to
help the digital champions in their work. The aim is for the project to
recruit and train a total of 1,400 digital champions during 2016, who will
then work with 9,500 digitally excluded people. Read more about One Digital
below.

Short link to the One Digital website:
http://bit.ly/20WJtie .

Full link to the One Digital website:
http://www.digitalchampionsnetwork.com/one-digital-programme .

Comment on this story, at E-Access Bulletin Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1111 .


++News in Brief:

+05: Directive Action: The European Blind Union (EBU) is campaigning for a
proposed European Parliament directive on website accessibility to be more
expansive. The directive sets out steps to make digital content on public
sector sites more accessible for users with visual impairments, but a
number of exceptions have been added since an earlier version of the text
was proposed in 2014. The EBU says that these exceptions would limit how
visually impaired users can access intranet systems, existing downloadable
documents and third-party content.

Short link to the EBU website: http://bit.ly/1oI0JGF .

Full link to the EBU website: http://www.euroblind.org/news/nr/2813 .


+06: Paralympic Prep: The new website of the 2020 Tokyo Paralympic and
Olympic Games has been launched. The site will provide information on
Paralympic sporting events, both at the 2020 Games and in a wider context,
and will be viewable and accessible on a range of devices, for users with
differing impairments. The website also complies with standards developed
by Japan’s Web Accessibility Infrastructure Committee.

Short link to Tokyo 2020 website: http://bit.ly/1Ua9gOR .

Full link to Tokyo 2020 website: https://tokyo2020.jp/en/ .


+07: Tech4Good 2016: Entry for the latest Tech4Good Awards opens next
month, March 15, for individuals and organisations within the UK. Now in
its sixth year, the event celebrates innovative uses of technology that
encourage positive social change. Winning projects from 2015 included
3D-printed bionic limbs, an app to connect homeless people with support
services, and a technology education programme for young people. Entry
details are at the links below.

Short link to Tech4Good website: http://bit.ly/212Ddpp .

Full link to Tech4Good website: http://www.tech4goodawards.com .


[Section Two ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust
e-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for people
with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust
by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


Section Three: Special report:
- How accessible is WordPress?

+08: Pressing issues.
By Graham Armfield.

WordPress is the world's most popular content management system (CMS). It
now powers over 20% of the world's websites, and that figure is steadily
rising. People choose WordPress for its flexibility as a web platform, and
because it can be used to create a stylish website extremely quickly, using
freely available themes (or templates) and plugins. But how accessible are
the websites produced with WordPress and the admin screens used to manage
those sites?

WordPress is a true open source project. It has been created and amended
over ten years by literally hundreds of developers. Sadly, many of these
developers had little or no knowledge or experience of accessibility,
meaning that many inaccessible practices were baked into WordPress themes,
plugins and admin screens.

- Admin screens and accessibility.
In 2011, accessibility of the WordPress admin screens was pretty dire and
many of the screens were unusable to anyone relying on assistive technology
or keyboard interaction. Isolated accessibility initiatives had previously
been undertaken, but they weren't always easy to find.

Since then, however, the Make WordPress Accessible Team (MWAT) has made a
significant difference. MWAT is a small group of volunteers committed to
improving accessibility. The situation is now a lot better, thanks to MWAT
talking about accessibility at WordPress meetups, raising bug tickets, and
in some cases, actually submitting improved code.

Now, all new functionality introduced into the admin area goes through an
accessibility review by MWAT volunteers. Existing inaccessible components
like the Media Library and Theme Customizer have also been vastly improved.


However, amending or adding new pages or blog posts can still be a little
fraught for screen-reader users. Keyboard shortcuts do exist to speed up
editing and formatting of pages and blog posts, but they are not readily
advertised.

- Themes and accessibility.
WordPress themes provide the template for the parts of a WordPress website
that the world sees. Off-the-shelf themes are freely available, and any PHP
developer can easily create a bespoke theme for a business or charity.

Thanks to the Make WordPress Accessible Team, there is now an extra,
optional, accessibility audit built into the theme review process. So when
theme developers submit their themes to WordPress, they can apply for an
'accessibility-ready' tag. People searching for an accessible off-the-peg
theme can use this tag to narrow their search. In October 2015 there were
69 free themes that carried this tag.

That may not sound like many, but it is significant considering there are
currently over 3,000 themes available from WordPress. Three recent default
themes also have a high level of accessibility, and it is hoped that one
day this accessibility audit will be included in the review of all new
themes.

Because of past accessibility reviews, there is now nothing in the
WordPress core functionality that will prevent the development of a fully
accessible website – assuming that an accessibility-ready theme or an
accessible bespoke theme is chosen.

- Accessibility of WordPress plugins.
Plugins provide useful or desirable extra functionality for websites, such
as spam blocking, SEO (search engine optimisation), Twitter feeds, contact
forms, lightboxes and carousels. While some areas within WordPress are
moving in the right direction, the situation around plugins isn't.

Like themes, plugins can be submitted by anyone, and although each plugin
also goes through a review process, there is no accessibility aspect to
that review. Sadly, that means that many plugins can and do compromise the
accessibility of a WordPress website, even if an accessible theme is being
used and the content authors know their stuff when it comes to
accessibility.

Issues here include: contact form generators where labels are not linked to
input fields; lightbox plugins where keyboard interaction is not possible
and where focus management is poor; and carousels that break with keyboard
interaction or with movement that can't be stopped.

- How can the situation improve?
As mentioned above, the Make WordPress Accessible Team is small, and all
members fit their WordPress accessibility work around other paid
assignments. The team needs more people to take part in regular
accessibility testing sessions, and to transform results into bug tickets
for developers to fix.

Each new version of WordPress contains new accessible functionality and
various accessibility fixes – there just needs to be more emphasis on it
to increase the rate of change.

- Would you like to join in?
Read more about the Make WordPress Accessible Team and help them with their
work at the links below:

Short link to the WordPress Accessibility blog:
http://bit.ly/1WAO6rN .

Full link to the WordPress Accessibility blog:
https://make.wordpress.org/accessibility .

Comment on this story now, at E-Access Bulletin Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1113 .


[Section Three ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Send comments on coverage or leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

Copyright 2016 Headstar Ltd:
http://www.headstar.com .
E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor
when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:
Editor: Tristan Parker.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 176 ends.]


--

 This message was sent to N.D.Freear@open.ac.uk by
eaccess@lists.headstar.com

 To forward this message, please do not use the forward button of your
email application, because this message was made specifically for you only.
Instead use the forward page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=forward&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824&mid=60>
in our newsletter system.

 To change your details and to choose which lists to be subscribed to,
visit your personal preferences page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=preferences&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>

 Or you can opt-out completely
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=unsubscribe&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>
from all future mailings.
