++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 180, June 2016.

A Headstar Publication, produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington
Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up page:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email requests, comments, news leads and article ideas to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 180 contents.

Section One: News.
01: Crowdsourcing site aims to be world leader for venue accessibility
data.
- Users score locations and personalise searches to their access needs.

02: Social networking through voice rather than vision.
- The voice messaging app being embraced by blind users.

03: Tactile Braille tablet brings pictures and content to life over 14
lines.
- Its makers want it to help improve literacy in low-income communities.


News in Brief: 04: Getting Better – UK councils improve web
accessibility; 05: Progressing Print – Canada’s drive for accessible
books; 06: Uniting Ideas – The UN talks inclusive tech.


Section Two: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.
07: Gaps in the Market – The difficulties of shopping for the right
product; 08: Smart Timing – Affordable smartwatches with a voice of their
own.


Section Three: Q & A – Katherine Payne, Wayfindr.
09: Navigating life’s obstacles.
Last year, Wayfindr hosted an audio navigation trial in London’s busy
Euston Tube station, featuring blind and visually impaired participants
finding their way around using spoken directions from a mobile app. Now,
Wayfindr has released an open standard, so that others can use the
knowledge to build digital audio navigation apps and systems. Wayfindr’s
Katherine Payne tells us more.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Crowdsourcing site aims to be world leader for venue accessibility
data.

A new online platform built around user ratings and feedback is aiming to
become “the world’s leading provider of accessible venue
information,” according to the site’s developer.

The Access Earth site is about to launch in full after ten months of public
testing in beta stage, with a mobile app to follow soon.

The platform allows users to give scores and leave comments about the
accessibility of hotels, restaurants and other locations around the world.
This information is then available to other users.

The platform was developed in 2012, after Matt McCann – who has cerebral
palsy – had booked a hotel describing itself online as ‘wheelchair
accessible’. On arrival, McCann found steps to the entrance and rooms too
small for his rollator mobility aid, sparking both frustration and a desire
to help prevent these situations for others.

McCann told e-Access Bulletin: “I knew that being a software engineer I
could do something about this lack of specific accessibility
information.”

The site’s database of venues across the globe is currently split into
four categories, covering places to eat and drink, places to sleep,
shopping, and things to do. Users select a venue type and where around the
world they want to search, before specifying accessibility criteria, such
as step-free access, ground floor rooms, and accessible bathrooms.

Anyone can supply a venue accessibility rating, either by answering Access
Earth’s ‘accessibility criteria’ or leaving a note: “This could be
something like ‘the elevator is currently out of order’, or directions
to the accessible bathrooms,” McCann said. “By keeping the access
information up-to-date, we can ensure people have the most accurate
information available to them.”

Users can also add and rate a new venue if it isn’t already on the
database, as well as sharing information and tips with other users.

The full Access Earth site will allow users to personalise their searches
based on their own individual accessibility criteria. Different profiles
for different access needs can also be created, McCann said: “For
example, someone may need only step-free access when on their own, but they
might also want an accessible bathroom when with a friend. Users can now
switch between those different profiles.”

An Access Earth app, scheduled for the end of August, will allow users to
easily leave accessibility feedback about locations from a mobile device.

Access Earth is one of a number of new and existing platforms that provide
crowdsourced location access information, including Johnny’s Pass,
Euan’s Guide (read our interview with the founder of Euan’s Guide at
the following link: http://eab.li/1l ) and Wheelmap. In March, one of
Wheelmap’s developers, Holger Dieterich, told e-Access Bulletin that his
goal was to share the site’s user-data with other location-based
services, so that more people can use it.

McCann is also keen to explore the idea of information-sharing for Access
Earth in the longer-term. “Collaboration is definitely something that we
would look to try and do in the future,” he said. “It’s great that
there are other people out there tackling this problem, it just shows that
this is a worldwide issue that needs to be addressed.”

Read more at the Access Earth website:
http://eab.li/1m .

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/1w .


+02: Social networking through voice rather than vision.

A free communication app based on voice messages is proving popular with
blind and visually impaired users, and has launched a Kickstarter
crowdfunding campaign to help expand its community.

Users of the Vorail app communicate by recording questions or thoughts as
short voice messages, which are available for other users to listen to and
reply. Users just need to set up a basic profile, without any photos or
images.

One of Vorail’s co-founders, Tom Rosenthal, told e-Access Bulletin that
although the app wasn’t designed specifically for blind and visually
impaired people, most users are from these groups. As a result, the team
behind the app now dedicate resources to making sure it is accessible.
Rosenthal said: “Vorail was designed to create a safer place where we can
see the true nature of others … There’s much more to a person than a
photo or what is revealed in text messages. That’s why we developed
Vorail – the voice is a window to the soul.”

Around 80,000 questions a day are asked on the app, covering a huge range
of topics. Subjects discussed include: Braille and guide dogs; personal
reflections on blindness; requests for relationship advice; and thoughts on
anything from favourite foods to nightclubs.

Some Vorail members use the app for dating, but it is also widely used to
meet new friends or simply connect with others. The user-community features
people who are married, engaged, dating, single and even families,
Rosenthal said. The first Vorail marriage is taking place soon, between two
people who met using the app, one from the UK, the other from the United
States.

Rosenthal said that while social media platforms like Facebook and Snapchat
are useful for networking with existing friends, Vorail allows its
community to meet new people easily. Similarly, while popular meeting and
dating sites are based around users’ photos, “Vorail was designed for
people that want to see beyond the picture … Technology can do better at
helping us find people who we share chemistry with,” Rosenthal said.

Vorail went live at the end of 2015 on Apple’s iOS operating system, and
recently launched a Kickstarter crowdfunding campaign to gauge public
interest in expanding to the Android operating system as well.

Find out more at Vorail’s Kickstarter page:
http://eab.li/1n .

Download Vorail for free at the Apple iOS App Store:
http://eab.li/1p .

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/1v .


+03: Tactile Braille tablet brings pictures and content to life over 14
lines.

A Braille tablet computer, thought to be the first of its kind available to
the public, is about to be launched with a series of potentially
game-changing features.

BLITAB is a tactile tablet computer designed for blind and visually
impaired users, claimed to be the first such tablet by its developers. The
design features a page of Braille over 14 lines, plus a smaller
touch-screen below. Through the touch-screen, which has voice-navigation,
users access the internet, email, documents and other content, which is
then converted into Braille above. This includes pictures, graphics, maps
and other images, which can all be represented on the Braille display.

The Braille is formed through a liquid-based system that creates small
bubbles, which raise and fall on the page. BLITAB’s 14 lines of Braille
presents an advantage over many standard Braille readers, which usually
feature one single line for text.

The device was developed by BLITAB Technology, a Bulgarian start-up company
now based in Austria. Kristina Tsvetanova, co-founder and CEO, had the idea
for BLITAB after a blind student at a Bulgarian university (where
Tsvetanova was studying industrial engineering) asked for her help to
register for classes online.

“I did some research, and realised that the technology boom over the past
few years had not benefited everyone,” Tsvetanova told e-Access Bulletin.

User-testing with visually impaired and blind participants helped shape
BLITAB’s development, and all standard features found on other tablet
computers (such as Wi-Fi, USB slots, Bluetooth and text-to-speech) are
available.

As reported in e-Access Bulletin’s March edition, BLITAB has received
funding from the Google Impact Challenge project. It was then demonstrated
at an event in Brussels earlier this year, which showcased accessible
technology that helps independent living.

BLITAB will be launched in beta (testing stage) at a mobile technology
conference, Mobile World Congress Shanghai, at the beginning of July. It
will be available for public purchase soon after that, said Tsvetanova, and
will cost €2,500 – a price similar to or cheaper than many full-size
refreshable Braille displays currently on the market.

Tsvetanova also wants BLITAB to help blind individuals in developing
countries and low-income communities, with the device acting as a literacy
aid, both for children in school and adults seeking employment. BLITAB can
be “a tool and platform that engenders confidence and knowledge of the
world, which is crucial for better quality of social life,” she said.

Find out more at the BLITAB website:
http://eab.li/1j .

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/1u .


++News in Brief:

+04: Getting Better: Local councils in the UK have ‘significantly
improved’ their website accessibility for users with disabilities,
according to a nation-wide assessment. The annual Better Connected report
(carried out by public sector IT management body Socitm) found that 64% of
council websites passed its accessibility test, compared to 43% in 2015 and
only 26% in 2014. The test assesses sites for ease of use with technologies
like screen-readers and keyboard-only controls.

Find out more at the Better Connected website:
http://eab.li/1q .


+05: Progressing Print: Blind and visually impaired people in Canada are on
track for greater access to books and other printed materials in accessible
formats (such as Braille and audiobooks), after a specially created bill
has been passed. The Bill C-11 amends Canada’s Copyright Act and ratifies
the Marrakesh Treaty, which sets out exceptions to copyright law to allow
international sharing of accessible books. The treaty now needs to be
ratified by several other countries to fully come into force.

Find out more at the Government of Canada website:
http://eab.li/1x .


+06: Uniting Ideas: Assistive technology was represented at a recent United
Nations event on the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. Panel talk topics included ‘Tec Talk’, which featured
members of the Hackaday platform and US publication ABILITY Magazine.
Projects discussed included Canon printers and copiers with voice-operation
software, and ABILITY embedding the VOICEYE text-to-speech print-reader to
increase content accessibility.

Find out more at ABILITY Magazine’s website:
http://eab.li/1r .


[Section One ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust.
E-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for people
with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust
by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


++ Notice: Supernova screen-reader support.
Are you a Supernova screen-reader user? Are you interested in having
someone provide you with remote support, via email, FaceTime or even Skype?
My name is Donna Jodhan and I am a certified Supernova instructor.
I am based in Toronto, Canada, but this does not stop me from providing you
with timely and reliable Supernova support. If you are interested and want
to learn more, then please email me at the address below and I will be
happy to respond:
donnajodhan@sterlingcreations.ca .

[Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all questions, comments and responses to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

+07: Gaps in the Market: Alan Philpott gets in touch to reply to a comment
in last month’s e-Access Bulletin. In that issue, Clive Lever wondered
why digital product accessibility doesn’t seem to feature in the training
received by retail staff who sell these products. Here are Alan’s
thoughts:

“For the most part, I don’t believe that the product training staff
receive in most stores in the UK is adequate – and not just in the field
Clive mentions. Everyone is affected by the poor service in shops (in terms
of knowledge) that occurs, but this problem, which can be overcome by
sighted people more easily, is very hard to deal with for blind and other
vision-impaired people, through mobility restrictions. This may make it
difficult to go to different shops before making a purchase, during which
time they might be able to find out the answers they need from one of the
ten or so shop assistants they encounter on their travels.

“For many blind and vision-impaired people, difficulties in accessing the
internet also have an effect, and accessing computer training is also
difficult, and may be very expensive and hard to come by when you are
unemployed … IT skills can deteriorate, one falls behind, and the whole
thing becomes a nightmare, as one struggles to find out the information
which one should have been given in the stores one visited in the first
place. Truly, a vicious circle in my view.”

Please send further replies and comments to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


+08: Smart Timing: Martin Jones gets in touch with a request for
information on accessible smartwatches with a voice navigation function.

“I recently bought a universal smartwatch, but the functions were not
usable with a voice feature. Are there any smartwatches which are
accessible, with a spoken voice function, but that are also affordable? I
think others will be interested in this too, as it makes the technology
accessible, but without leaving [blind and visually impaired] people
vulnerable to theft, like mobile phones do.”

Suggestions and replies, please, to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


[Section Two ends].


++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.
e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month in a
new feature on the station’s Afternoon Edition programme. Hear more about
the bulletin and upcoming content appearing in each issue, as we discuss
the latest accessible technology news and readers’ questions with Allan
Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts. Listen to and
download the latest edition at the following link:
http://eab.li/1y .

Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via television, smartphone or
radio. Listening details at the following link:
http://eab.li/1g .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website:
http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].


Section Three: Q & A.
- Katherine Payne, Wayfindr.

+09: Navigating life’s obstacles.

Audio navigation systems can be a useful tool to help blind and visually
impaired people become more independent and mobile, particularly when used
in an app.

The Wayfindr project has just unveiled a valuable contribution to the field
by releasing the first ‘open standard’ for audio navigation. The
standard features detailed guidelines to help developers, transport
services and building owners create digital navigation systems that can be
used by blind and visually impaired people.

Last year, Wayfindr organised a trial in London’s Eutson Tube Station,
featuring blind and visually impaired participants navigating the station
through a demo mobile app. The app spoke directions out loud to the users,
triggered by Bluetooth ‘beacons’ around the station. With the trial
successful and the open standard released, it seems like there’s big
potential for Wayfindr to make a real difference.

e-Access Bulletin spoke to one of the Wayfindr team, Katherine Payne, to
find out more.

- How did the idea for Wayfindr come about?

“In 2014 the Royal London Society for Blind People’s Youth Forum
released their youth manifesto, which detailed the challenges they faced as
blind young Londoners. One of the main challenges was transport. They
wanted to navigate the London Underground transport system independently.
Working with digital product studio ustwo, the Youth Forum investigated how
mainstream technology could support this. Using Bluetooth low energy
beacons and smartphones, we have developed a system of audio-based
navigation.”

- How does Wayfindr work?

“Emerging indoor navigation technologies, such as Bluetooth low energy
beacons, hold the key to opening up the world for vision-impaired people.
However, in order to achieve the greatest impact globally, there is a
pressing need to develop a consistent standard to be used across wayfinding
systems. This will truly open up a world where vision-impaired people are
no longer held back by their sight loss, removing barriers to employment,
to seeing friends and family, and engaging in their community.

“The Wayfindr Open Standard aims to do just that. It gives venue owners
and digital navigation service providers the tools to implement high
quality, consistent audio wayfinding solutions. It also includes an
open-source demo app that enables people who download it to use Bluetooth
beacons, to understand and implement the open standard with real users, in
real contexts, in real time.”

- Who is the standard aimed at and where might it be used?

“The aim is that this open standard will help lower the barrier for
built-environment owners and digital navigation services to make their
environments, products and services inclusive from the outset, as we
continue to weave technology into our cities.

“We hope it will be used across transport networks and digital navigation
services, including places like Tranport For London and the CityMapper
transport app.”

- What kind of research helped produce the standard?

“Various resources informed the content of the standard, which is still a
first-version working draft. These resources include user-research from
trials of London Pimlico Underground Station, Sydney Town Hall Train
Station and London Euston Underground Station. Academic research supports
the findings from these trials.

“Additionally, factual information about vision-impairment and the
navigation techniques of vision impaired people was used, plus input and
feedback from industry experts.”

- What applications does the Wayfindr open standard have for blind and
visually impaired people?

“Eventually it will be other trains, and not just the London Underground,
that vision-impaired people will be able to navigate on their own. It could
then be expanded to city level, to restaurants and to shops. Ruksana, a
member of the Royal London Society for Blind People’s Youth Forum, made
the following comment about these ideas: ‘That would be really
revolutionary, it would change our lives. We wouldn’t need any assistance
to get anywhere.’”

- How do you hope to develop Wayfindr in the future?

“We want to see audio wayfinding solutions across the world – in
transport networks, shopping centres, hospitals and other places. We
can’t do this alone. We need the Wayfindr community to keep sharing their
knowledge, expertise and experience, to strengthen the standard and
implement accessible navigation solutions globally.”


Find out more at the Wayfindr website:
http://eab.li/1k .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/1t .


[Section Three ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

Copyright 2016 Headstar Ltd.
E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor
when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:
Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 180 ends.]


---

This message was sent to XXX by
eaccess@lists.headstar.com

 To forward this message, please do not use the forward button of your
email application, because this message was made specifically for you only.
Instead use the forward page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=forward&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824&mid=80>
in our newsletter system.

 To change your details and to choose which lists to be subscribed to,
visit your personal preferences page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=preferences&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>

 Or you can opt-out completely
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=unsubscribe&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>
from all future mailings.
