++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 178, April 2016.

A Headstar Publication, produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington
Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up page:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email requests, comments, news leads and article ideas to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 178 contents.

Section One: News.
01: Low-cost refreshable Braille display set to revolutionise the market:
- A new device aims to make refreshable Braille affordable.

02: Integrate accessibility into teaching practices, says field expert:
- A call for accessibility to become part of more educational curriculums.

03: Technology company award for ‘helping kids learn’ across the globe:
- Assistive educational package given prestigious business recognition.


News in Brief: 04: Talking Tweets – Twitter gets image-descriptive; 05:
Invaluable Insights – business accessibility portal launched; 06: Tech
Deadline – Tech4Good Awards closing date.


Section Two: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.
07: Refreshing Braille – a new lease of life for people in developing
countries?; 08: Virtual Viewing – can virtual reality make watching TV
with a visual impairment easier?


Section Three: Special Report – ICT barriers for older people.
09: How can we keep in touch with technology?
A new academic study has explored if and how older adults with dual sensory
impairment (DSI) can use assistive technology to live more independent
lives. While the benefits of this technology may seem obvious, a number of
barriers preventing its use remain. Two authors of the study, Kate Hamblin
and Sue Yeandle, discuss what those barriers are, and what can be done to
remove them.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Low-cost refreshable Braille display set to revolutionise the market.

A device that could become ‘the world’s most affordable refreshable
Braille display’ – costing around 80-90% less than current systems –
has been unveiled, and should be available for purchase later this year.

The Orbit Reader 20 was announced at the Annual International Technology
and Persons with Disabilities Conference – known as CSUN – in the
United States, by the Chair of the Royal National Institute of Blind People
(RNIB), Kevin Carey, in his role as president of the Transforming Braille
Group (TBG).

TBG was conceived to realise and produce an affordable refreshable Braille
display, partly as a way to give people in developing countries greater
access to refreshable Braille. Current devices are prohibitively expensive,
often running into thousands of US Dollars or British Pounds. TBG set about
raising 1.25 million US Dollars for the Orbit Reader 20 to be produced by
assistive technology company Orbit Research (further background in a
previous e-Access Bulletin at the following link: http://eab.li/v ).

Refreshable Braille displays allow blind or visually impaired users to read
text from a computer screen via a system of small rods in Braille cells.
These rods are electronically raised and lowered, creating readable Braille
that constantly changes, or ‘refreshes’, as the user scrolls or moves
across the screen.

The Orbit Reader 20 features 20 Braille cells and can be connected to a
computer or mobile phone via USB or Bluetooth. There is also an SD card
slot to enable loading and reading of books and other files.

Speaking to e-Access Bulletin, Carey explained that the aim is for the
Orbit Reader 20 to be sold for $320 per unit, but this is dependant on
Orbit Research receiving enough pre-orders for the device: “Orbit need an
order of 200,000 to make the optimum price of $320 a unit, so what
they’re doing is collecting wholesale orders. If it’s below 200,000,
the price goes up,” Carey said.

On its website, Orbit Research claims that the Orbit Reader 20 will be the
“world’s most affordable refreshable Braille display”.

User-testing of the Orbit Reader took place in January on 27 prototype
machines, in North America and Europe, by testers both with and without
experience of refreshable Braille systems. Carey will be supervising
further testing in India and Kenya. Speaking about the results of this
testing in his CSUN speech, Carey said that the refreshable Braille on the
Orbit Reader was “the best that experienced users have ever seen”.

The refresh rate on the device was found to be suitable for
“poor-to-average” Braille-users, but not effective enough for
“experienced users”. However, as Carey then pointed out: “Those who
have reported dissatisfaction with the refresh rate are very experienced
users of high-end refreshable Braille note-takers or Braille bars attached
to generic devices – but it is important to note that these are precisely
the Braille readers for whom the Orbit Reader was not designed.” (Read
Kevin Carey’s CSUN speech in full at the Transforming Braille Group’s
website: http://eab.li/r .)

Carey told e-Access Bulletin that the device could be revolutionary for
visually impaired Braille-users due to its low cost. “Whichever way you
look at it, the [price] is just way below anything anybody else is
offering,” he said. Carey also pointed out that the timing of when the
Orbit Reader will be available, “is simply to do with how fast the orders
come in [to Orbit Research].”

The Orbit Reader 20 isn’t yet available to purchase by the general
public, but Orbit Research’s website says that the device will be
available in “late 2016”. It appears that when it does go on sale, the
Reader will be sold through the website of the American Printing House for
the Blind (APH), one of the shareholders in the project.

Find out more about the Orbit Reader 20 at the links below:

Orbit Research website:
http://eab.li/s .

APH website:
http://eab.li/u .

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/z .


+02: Integrate accessibility into teaching practices, says field expert.

Accessibility should be weaved into more educational curriculums and
demonstrated in teaching, a specialist consultant told delegates at a
recent conference.

Speaking at the ‘Digital Accessibility in Higher and Further Education
Conference 2016’, David Sloan, a user experience engineer from
accessibility agency The Paciello Group, said that accessibility needs to
be integrated into the fabric of any curriculum featuring digital content
creation, and can no longer be taught in isolation.

“It’s not something we can treat as a specialism, that inevitably
becomes a class that somebody can skip because they are busy or doing
something else,” Sloan said.

He went on to say that accessible communication is a “core digital
literacy” that everyone should develop. “It’s not something we [can]
leave to computing science to teach and everyone else can forget about. If
we are thinking about digital literacy as a general concept that we want
our employees of the future to acquire and use, then accessible
communication needs to be part of that,” Sloan said.

Another crucial challenge, said Sloan, is for educators to directly apply
inclusive practices when teaching: “Too often, I have seen [a situation]
where somebody will stand up and talk about accessibility, saying something
like: ‘Here’s an example of an inaccessible image that doesn’t have
appropriate alt text, as you can see in the slide beside me.’ Hang on a
minute, you are talking about an accessibility issue and assuming that
everybody can see the slide on the screen.”

Addressing these kinds of oversights through inclusive teaching should be a
“core professional skill” among educators, said Sloan: “A failure to
do that weakens the message that digital accessibility is a core skill that
our learners should be acquiring.”

The conference was sponsored by BCS (the British Computer Society), and
took place in London. More information about the presentations can be found
at the link below to the BCS website:
http://eab.li/l .

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/y .


+03: Technology company wins award for ‘helping kids learn’ across the
globe.

A UK assistive technology company has been given a prestigious business
award for exporting an e-learning software package for children with
disabilities.

Inclusive Technology – which provides equipment for individuals with
physical disabilities, sensory impairments or learning difficulties –
received a Queen’s Award for Enterprise for its HelpKidzLearn product.
HelpKidzLearn features games, activities and tools designed for young
children with a range of specialist learning needs.

The company was recognised in the ‘International Trade’ category of the
Queen’s Award for Enterprise (an annual event that commends a range UK
business achievements), for signing up over 25,000 paying subscribers to
HelpKidzLearn across 148 countries.

The United States is the largest user of HelpKidzLearn, and the product is
also being used in 14 countries across Europe, in eight different
languages.

The basic HelpKidzLearn package costs £55/$99 for one annual subscription
(the idea is for a teacher or parent to purchase the subscription, and use
the package with a child). Other multiple subscriptions (for use in
schools, with multiple learners) can also be purchased. The package
provides over 80 activities designed to aid learning.

The activities – including games, quizzes, stories and songs – can be
accessed on a range of devices and equipment, such as keyboard switches,
touch-screen, rollerball mouse and eye-tracking technology. A free, basic
version of HelpKidzLearn is also available, featuring ten activities (Read
more at the HelpKidzLearn website: http://eab.li/o ).

Chairman, CEO and co-founder of Inclusive Technology Martin Littler – who
also founded the British Assistive Technology Association (BATA) – will
collect the award at Buckingham Palace, London, in July. In a statement on
the Inclusive Technology website, Littler said: “I am absolutely
delighted with this brilliant award, which I feel recognises the huge
contribution that the whole British assistive technology industry has made
during the past 40 years. Of course, the award is also a huge pat on the
back for our team of developers, teachers and therapists, all of whom get a
buzz from producing resources which can transform the lives of learners
with special educational needs and disabilities.”

Find out more at the Inclusive Technology website:
http://eab.li/p .

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/x .


++News in Brief:

+04: Talking Tweets: Twitter has taken a step to improve its accessibility
by allowing users to add descriptions to their images. Assistive
technologies such as screen-readers can now pick up these descriptions
(known as alt text) and read them to users who are unable to see the
images. However, the feature is currently only available on the Twitter
mobile apps for the iOS and Android operating systems.

Read more at the official Twitter blog:
http://eab.li/m .


+05: Invaluable Insights: UK bank Barclays has launched an online portal
offering free advice to businesses on making products and services more
accessible. The portal features information on why accessibility matters,
potential barriers for businesses to avoid, and insights from its own work,
which has led to the company receiving praise for its accessibility
efforts.

Read more at the Barclays accessibility portal:
http://eab.li/n .


+06: Tech Deadline: Entry for the 2016 Tech4Good Awards closes on May 6.
The event champions individuals, charities, public bodies and businesses
across the UK that are using technology to improve lives. Founded by
technology charity AbilityNet, the awards – which are split into
categories including ‘Digital Skills’ and ‘Community Impact’ –
are open to all, and people can nominate themselves or others. Entry
details are at the link below:

Read more at the Tech4Good Awards website:
http://bit.ly/212Ddpp .


[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions, requests and responses to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

+07: Refreshing Braille: Long-time bulletin reader Anthony Bernard writes
in from Sri Lanka to express support for an item featured in this very
issue – the affordable refreshable Braille display masterminded by the
Transforming Braille Group (TBG). The topic was first covered by e-Access
Bulletin in 2014, when Dan Jellinek reported on an initial one million
dollar funding-boost for the project (read Dan’s 2014 news report at the
following link: http://eab.li/v ).

Anthony was pleased to hear about the unveiling of the new device (and its
intended price tag of 320 US Dollars) when he read the online transcript of
a speech by TBG founder Kevin Carey, from the device launch at a recent
assistive technology conference.

“I read the launching speech from Kevin Carey and was much encouraged. If
Kevin wants me to be one of the testers and suggest ideas, I am available.
We in developing countries will welcome this new product. It promises to
give another lease of life to Braille. $320, or even $350, is not too much
to ask for a Braille display, considering the more advanced displays
costing thousands of dollars. Please keep me updated with the latest
developments of this product.”

Read the lead news story in this issue for more coverage, found above.

Further responses and comments, please, to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


+08: Virtual Viewing: Steve Brazier, another long-time bulletin reader,
writes in with an information request about virtual reality equipment as a
potential viewing aid, and to express his sadness at the passing of
e-Access Bulletin editor and founder Dan Jellinek.

“I’m so sorry to hear about Dan. We never met, but had corresponded
over the years since the Bulletin began. It is very good that the bulletin
is going again. I wanted to ask if anyone had information on virtual
reality headsets or goggles. I wondered if a partially sighted user might
be able to maximise the use of their peripheral vision by viewing live TV,
a smartphone screen or a PC screen via such a headset.

“I have suffered from macular degeneration [a condition which affects
central vision of the eye], due to myopic maculopathy, and for years have
watched TV with ‘8x’ magnification binoculars, mounted on a microphone
stand. Even football matches are reasonably easy to see. It struck me that
if any virtual reality headsets allowed live video input, they might do the
job even better.”

Please email any responses, advice or comments to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

[Section Two ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust
e-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for people
with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust
by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


Section Three: Special report.
- ICT barriers for older people.

+09: How can we keep in touch with technology?

By Kate Hamblin and Sue Yeandle.

All too often, the deterioration of sight and hearing are seen as ‘just
part of getting older’, and as a result are under-reported and
inadequately assessed. When hearing and vision are both impaired, they
present a unique challenge which requires new strategies and management.
It’s estimated that 222,000 people in the UK aged over 70 have dual
sensory impairment (DSI), and that by 2030 that number will be close to
418,000. Recognising this, UK deafblind charity Sense established a
research team in 2010 to undertake new projects evaluating the impact of
DSI across the lifespan. One of these projects created a screening tool for
DSI for use in residential care settings, while another project explored
issues related to living independently in older age with DSI.

A study at the University of Sheffield, ‘Keeping in Touch with
Technology?’, is part of this research, and explores the use of assistive
technology and telecare by older adults with DSI. Sense commissioned the
study in 2014 and we completed it in 2015. The University of Sheffield’s
CIRCLE (Centre for International Research on Care, Labour and Equalities)
worked with Sense and the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing to examine
issues related to the challenges faced by older adults with DSI, and the
role of assistive technology and telecare devices in promoting active and
independent lives.

As part of a previous study that looked at independence in later life, we
regularly visited elderly participants over a period of 4-6 months, to
explore their use of technology and their wider lives. This included their
personal biographies, relationships, communities and health. We adapted
this methodology for our work with Sense and our research team, making 146
household visits to 38 older adults with varying degrees of DSI. These
adults had a variety of assistive technology and telecare in place, ranging
from quite ‘low-tech’ devices to expensive, highly specialist
equipment.

We explored participants’ use of technology in managing difficulties they
faced in everyday life. These difficulties were arranged into three groups:
activities outside the home (transport, shopping, socialising); activities
inside the home (household chores, personal care); and, communicating with
others. Some participants had coped well with single sensory impairment for
many years, but now had to adjust to the deterioration of the other sense
on which they had previously relied. Technology could sometimes help: GPS
devices helped with navigation, ‘talking’ kitchen technology items made
cooking easier, and personal loop systems and Braille displays promoted
communication.

In some situations, technology gave people with DSI valuable extra support,
but there were also barriers in using and accessing technology. Some felt
intimidated by technology, or felt that it was not “for them”. Limited
awareness was another barrier – people in the study were often unsure
what technology was available, and even if they felt an item of equipment
might be useful, they found the huge variety of manufacturers and suppliers
confusing and off-putting. Specialist technology can be very expensive, so
making choices based on limited information or experience was deemed to be
“risky”.

Cost and choice were also major barriers. Those who had resources felt that
some equipment was prohibitively expensive, while those who relied on
equipment provided by their local authority said their choice was limited.
Some participants felt their local authority’s assessment for equipment
focused only on safety and risk, and failed to address other needs or give
them access to activities where technology could help.

Some felt that the products they had tried were not “fit for purpose”,
and that a lot of equipment had been designed with only single-sensory
impairment in mind. Participants felt that using these devices involved a
“compromise”, and in many of our research visits, the team saw
assistive technology equipment which had been abandoned. Inadequate
training and follow-up support was another issue, with some participants
unsure as to how to use their devices correctly, or what to do if they went
wrong.

Our findings indicate that service providers, equipment suppliers and
product developers need to do more to meet the needs of older people with
DSI – the size of this group is growing fast, just as technology is also
advancing at a rapid rate. Where technology was successfully adopted, the
following things happened: participants felt much safer at home; they were
using public transport alone; they could manage everyday chores unaided;
and they enjoyed new modes of communication and social interactions.

However, we also found worrying barriers to accessing and using technology.
To address this, we recommend an increase in awareness-raising and
campaigning around technology and DSI. This will help older people with DSI
find out what products are available, and where and how they can obtain
them. We also highlight the importance of raising awareness of the needs of
people with DSI in the product-design community. This will ensure that, in
future, products are developed with this growing group firmly in mind.


The ‘Keeping in Touch with Technology?’ report was compiled by Kate
Hamblin, Sue Yeandle and Emma-Reetta Koivunen. Dr Kate Hamblin is James
Martin Senior Research Fellow at the Oxford Institute of Population Ageing,
University of Oxford. Sue Yeandle is Professor of Sociology and Director of
CIRCLE at the University of Sheffield. Dr Emma-Reetta Koivunen is Research
Associate in the Faculty of Health and Social Care, Manchester Metropolitan
University.

The full report can be found at the link below in PDF:
http://eab.li/t .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/w .


[Section Three ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

Copyright 2016 Headstar Ltd.
E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor
when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:
Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 178 ends.]


--

 This message was sent to N.D.Freear@open.ac.uk by
eaccess@lists.headstar.com

 To forward this message, please do not use the forward button of your
email application, because this message was made specifically for you only.
Instead use the forward page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=forward&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824&mid=73>
in our newsletter system.

 To change your details and to choose which lists to be subscribed to,
visit your personal preferences page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=preferences&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>

 Or you can opt-out completely
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=unsubscribe&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>
from all future mailings.
