++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 179, May 2016.

A Headstar Publication, produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington
Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up page:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email requests, comments, news leads and article ideas to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 179 contents.

Section One: News.
01: A cautious welcome as Europe looks to lock-in web accessibility:
- A “significant milestone”, but still progress to be made on
legislation.

02: The Kindle begins to find its voice with text-to-speech:
- Amazon’s e-reader gets screen-reader-friendly functionality.

03: Your assistive technology queries answered online by an expert:
- Utilise professional advice on a charity’s community forum.


News in Brief: 04: Route Finding – First open standard for digital
navigation; 05: Citizen Feedback – Government site launches technology
survey; 06: Testers Wanted – Screen-reader users requested.


Section Two: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.
07: Time for Translation – A request to run e-Access Bulletin in other
languages; 08: Getting on Course – is a lack of specialist IT training
sapping digital inclusion?.


Section Three: Opinion – Conquering the website accessibility divide.
09: Realising the dream.
In 2012, Donna Jodhan, a blind accessibility consultant and writer, struck
a blow for the rights of disabled citizens when she won a prolonged court
battle against the Canadian Government for the inaccessibility of its
websites. Since then, she has continued to be a vocal champion of equality
for blind citizens. Here, she reflects on how inaccessible websites hinder
day-to-day living, and explains why she is fighting for disability
legislation in Canada.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: A cautious welcome as Europe looks to lock-in web accessibility.

A provisional agreement to make public sector websites and mobile apps
across Europe more accessible has been reached, creating mixed reactions
from the accessibility community.

The deal between the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union
and the European Commission was made earlier this month, and relates to the
existing ‘Directive on Web Accessibility for Public Sector Websites’,
which has been the subject of debate since its introduction in 2012 (See
e-Access Bulletin’s previous coverage at the following link:
http://eab.li/b ).

If formalised, the directive would demand that both new and existing public
sector sites and apps be more accessible to citizens with disabilities
across the European Union (EU). Older public sector content would also be
made accessible when requested by citizens.

Carine Marzin, Chair of the European Blind Union (EBU) Campaigns Network,
told e-Access Bulletin that the EBU welcomed this “significant
milestone” based on the information publicly available, but warned that
the final text of the directive is still to be released.

Marzin said that the EBU is also encouraged at the inclusion of mobile apps
in the initial agreement – an issue it has been campaigning for. Another
EU campaign focused on eliminating proposed exceptions to the directive,
which would have meant that public sector intranet services and other
content formats would have been excluded from accessibility regulations.
Marzin said that “significant progress” appeared to have been made on
some of these exceptions, again based on available information. Such
intranet services are “very important for all disabled people in terms of
access to education and jobs,” she said.

However, there is still some way to go before any enforceable web
accessibility regulations appear. The agreement needs to be formally
adopted by the Council and the European Parliament, and then formed into
legislation across all EU countries. In practice, it could be several years
before the proposed new accessibility rules are applicable; legislation
would first be created for new websites, followed by remaining public
sector sites, and mobile apps after that.

Technology access charity AbilityNet also welcomed the initial agreement,
but called for the measures to go further than just regulating public
sector content. Writing on the charity’s website, CEO Nigel Lewis said:
“AbilityNet wholeheartedly welcomes this recent move … but it doesn’t
go far enough … Policy makers are missing a trick by not including
websites and apps in the private and third sectors. Their sheer volume
vastly outweighs public sector websites and in our experience, they lag
behind the public sector in accessibility terms.”

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/19 .


+02: The Kindle begins to find its voice with text-to-speech.

Amazon is making its Kindle e-readers more accessible for visually impaired
users by introducing a screen-reader feature.

The VoiceView screen-reading function is now available on the Kindle
Paperwhite model by plugging in the ‘Kindle Audio Adaptor’, a USB
device designed by Amazon specifically for use with the Kindle. Users plug
the adaptor into the Paperwhite charging jack, before plugging in
headphones to the adaptor, and can then listen to e-books and navigate the
Kindle interface through text-to-speech and touch-screen functionality,
with eight adjustable reading speeds.

VoiceView was previously only available on Amazon’s Fire tablet devices,
but the company has now extended it to the Paperwhite – seen as the
‘mid-range’ Kindle option. Currently, it’s only this one model that
supports VoiceView, but a post on Amazon’s blog says that the feature
“will be available in the future with other Kindle e-readers as well.”

The VoiceView-enabled Paperwhite Kindle is being sold in a special package,
including the audio adaptor, for $140. This is $20 more than the standard
Paperwhite price, but Amazon is supplying a $20 Amazon account credit with
all purchases, to offset the extra cost.

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/18 .


+03: Your assistive technology queries answered online by an expert.

Anyone seeking advice on assistive technology will be able to call on the
expertise of a technology professional, thanks to a community forum on the
website of disability charity Scope.

The charity’s ‘Ask an assistive technologist’ service allows users to
leave questions on the forum, where they will be read by a specialist, who
will then leave advice for the user to pick up. Users just need to register
on the site to become part of Scope’s online community, and can then post
questions.

Kim Lawther, an assistive technologist at Craig y Parc School in Cardiff,
Wales, will be answering the queries. Lawther works with children and young
adults with a range of disabilities at the Cardiff school, and has
extensive knowledge of assistive equipment.

Lawther explained more about the process to e-Access Bulletin: “Scope has
a phenomenal team of assistive technologists, so if I don’t know the
answer to someone’s question, then I am sure one of us will. I also
intend to point people in the direction of more information – for
example, about suppliers or funding.”

The service was initially available in 2014 with a different assistive
technologist, but after a temporary hiatus, the new appointment of Lawther
as the community advisor has effectively relaunched the initiative.

So far, questions left for Lawther have covered a wide rage of topics in
just a few weeks. Forum members have asked about: speech-recognition
software; Google Cardboard (a newly launched virtual reality headset);
making banking accessible for users of eye-tracking technology; games
programming for users with learning disabilities; and a new app to help
people with communication difficulties, AzuleJoe.

Find out more and ask a question on Scope’s ‘Ask an assistive
technologist’ forum, at the following link:
http://eab.li/13 .

Comment on this story at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/17 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Route Finding: The first open standard for digital navigation
services, which can assist people with visual impairments in independent
navigation, has been published by non-profit organisation Wayfindr.
Feedback is invited on the draft standard, which aims to improve the
navigability of the built environment by informing developers, venue
owners, and researchers. Look out for more on the Wayfindr standard in
June’s e-Access Bulletin.

Read more at the Wayfindr website:
http://eab.li/1e .


+05: Citizen Feedback: The UK Government services citizens’ portal,
GOV.UK, has launched a survey to find out what types of assistive
technology its audience uses to access the site. Users of screen-readers,
screen-magnifiers, voice-input applications, and literacy software are
invited to take part, and can also comment on any accessibility barriers
they encounter on GOV.UK.

Take the survey at the following link, before the end of June:
http://eab.li/1d .


+06: Testers Wanted: A free web browser extension that makes social media
platforms (including Facebook, YouTube and WhatsApp) and other websites
more accessible for screen-readers is looking for user-testers. After
launching in October 2015, the team behind F123 Access now want to make
customer relationship management (CRM) software accessible for blind and
visually impaired users, and are seeking users of NVDA, Orca, Jaws, and
Window-Eyes screen-readers to help develop their work. Anyone interested
can email the following address for details:
devs@f123.org .

Find out more at the F123 Access website:
http://eab.li/12 .


[Section One ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust
e-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for people
with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust
by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all questions, comments and responses to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

+07: Time for Translation: Zeljko Bajic, a blind journalist working for
public radio in Serbia, has been reading e-Access Bulletin for a number of
years, and gets in touch to ask about the possibility of getting it
translated.

“Do any opportunities exist to run e-Access in our languages – Serbian,
Croatian, Bosnian? Unfortunately, we don’t have anything similar to
E-Access Bulletin here. It would be very important additional support, for
me and others. I wait for your answer with hope!”

Please send suggestions and comments to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


+08: Getting on Course: Digital inclusion consultant Clive Lever, formerly
a local government diversity and equality officer, writes in with a general
accessibility query that many readers will have encountered in some form
before.

“A blind friend of mine asked me why it is that we get accessible
mainstream technology (both hardware and software), and then a couple of
releases later, access is broken and we have to start again.

“His question, and my own recent experiences of support at a popular
consumer technology store (where the in-store agents didn’t have a clue
how to work a device’s accessibility speech navigation), have convinced
me that the answer could lie in training: do all IT training courses
include access and inclusion? If not, why not?”

Replies and comments, please, to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


[Section Two ends].


++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.
e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month in a
new feature on the station’s Afternoon Edition programme. Hear more about
the bulletin and upcoming content appearing in each issue, as we discuss
the latest accessible technology news and readers’ questions with Allan
Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts. Listen to and
download the latest edition at the following link:
http://eab.li/1i .

Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via television, smartphone or
radio. Listening details at the following link:
http://eab.li/1g .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website:
http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].


Section Three: Opinion.
- Conquering the website accessibility divide.

+09: Realising the dream.

By Donna Jodhan.

There is the digital divide and then there is the technology divide. Now
I’d like to add the website accessibility divide to this list.

The ‘website accessibility divide’ refers to those of us who are unable
to access websites due to navigable and usability reasons, versus those who
do not have any difficulty accessing websites.

The former group often describes those of us who are visually impaired, and
for me, as one who falls into this category, I can tell you that it makes a
huge difference in my personal life whenever I am unable to do things such
as: access information independently and in privacy; complete forms on my
own; request information without having to ask for sighted help; download
and read documents without having to ask for sighted assistance; read
content on a website on my own.

On a personal level, inaccessible and unusable websites have a direct
affect on my life.  My ability to protect and maintain my confidentiality,
independence and privacy are all affected. In short, I often have no
alternative but to place all of this in the hands of strangers if I am
unable to find a friend or family member that I trust to assist me.

For me and others like me, we are all in the same boat, so to speak. We
cannot have access to vital information if we are unable to access websites
independently. We cannot make vital decisions on our own behalf if we are
unable to read information for ourselves in an independent manner.

For example: important information pertaining to such things as public
safety, security, health, job and financial markets, social programs, and
up-to-the-minute news are often beyond our reach, because of the website
accessibility divide.

This is the main reason why I launched a charter challenge against the
Canadian Government in 2006 – because their websites were inaccessible to
me and to other blind Canadians. I could not apply for a job through their
websites on my own, and access to vital information was horribly lacking.

Yes! True it is that we won a landmark victory that mandated the Canadian
Government to make all of their websites accessible, and true it is that
things have improved in a noticeable way, but there is still a lot of work
to be done when it comes to this.

Canada does not have any sort of legislation in place that mandates and
penalises federally regulated companies and agencies if their websites are
not accessible to Canadians with vision impairments. As a result,
inaccessible and unusable websites continue to be a part of the lives of
those Canadians with vision impairments.

We, as visually impaired Canadians, continue to live at the whim of website
developers who do not believe that website accessibility and usability are
important enough for them to include in their design, and this is why I
personally decided to take one more step.

In early 2015, I, along with a small group, launched Barrier Free Canada
– Canada sans Barrières; a non-partisan grassroots organisation whose
main objective is to lobby the Canadian Government to pass a Canadians with
Disabilities Act. During the October 2015 Canadian election campaign, three
parties committed to passing such legislation, including the governing
Liberal Party lead by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.

This new government has committed two million dollars towards this
initiative in its most recent budget. This is good news for us! We are now
waiting on the minister responsible for disabilities issues to commence
public hearings, as part of the process to pass a Canadians with
Disabilities Act. It is our cherished hope that such an act can be passed
in time for Canada's 150th anniversary on the first day of July, 2017.

As it stands now, the majority of Canada’s new Parliament supports the
passage of a Canadians with Disabilities Act, so that is one major hurdle
that has been overcome.  Now comes the more difficult task of actually
getting the act drafted and placed before the Canadian Parliament.

It is my personal dream that some day soon, all Canadians will be able to
access websites independently, and in doing so be able to protect their
privacy and confidentiality. This should not be a dream, because under the
Canadian Charter of Rights, all Canadians are guaranteed equal access to
information. Yet I can only continue to dream – for myself, for all
Canadians who are visually impaired, but most of all, for our children of
the future.

As Robert F. Kennedy, paraphrasing George Bernard Shaw, once said: “Some
men see things as they are and say, ‘Why?’; I dream things that never
were and say, ‘Why not?’”  Maybe I should be a bit more realistic,
but in my heart I know that somewhere over the rainbow I will some day
realise my dream.

I promised Steve Jobs to help change the world and I will keep this
promise, because he kept his promise to us.


Find out more about Barrier-Free Canada at the following link:
http://eab.li/15 .

Read more about Donna Jodhan at her website:
http://eab.li/14 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/16 .


[Section Three ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

Copyright 2016 Headstar Ltd.
E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor
when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:
Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 179 ends.]


--

 This message was sent to N.D.Freear@open.ac.uk by
eaccess@lists.headstar.com

 To forward this message, please do not use the forward button of your
email application, because this message was made specifically for you only.
Instead use the forward page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=forward&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824&mid=75>
in our newsletter system.

 To change your details and to choose which lists to be subscribed to,
visit your personal preferences page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=preferences&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>

 Or you can opt-out completely
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=unsubscribe&uid=f4d5f2a645ac25411415cc072892e824>
from all future mailings.
