Headstar <eaccess@lists.headstar.com>
To	nfreear@yahoo.co.uk  --  Today at 11:31 / 30 October..



++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 183, October 2016.

A Headstar Publication, produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington
Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up page below:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email questions, comments, article ideas and news leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 183 contents.

Section One: Editor’s note.
01: Remembering Dan Jellinek, one year on.


Section Two: News.
02: New research reveals barriers and solutions to accessibility across
government.
- Project managers urged to take responsibility for implementation.

03: US Congress called on to create technology equality bill.
- “Aggressive steps” also needed to comply with ICT access law.

04: Free online learning course opens up accessibility to all.
- New e-learning programme on digital accessibility.


News in Brief: 05: Public Sector Progress – European directive approved;
06: Accessible Apple – new information portal launched; 07: Workplace
Tech – crowdsourced dialogue.


Section Three: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.
08: Maximising Mobility – Participants needed for research; 09: Tactile
Touring – Exploring the Houses of Parliament; 10: More Museums –
Accessible exhibitions advice.


Section Four: Special report – The Hackaday Assistive Technology Prize
winners.
11: Hacking for good: winners in their own words.
The annual Hackaday Prize contest asks tech-savvy creatives to “build
something that matters”. Selected from hundreds of entries, the winners
of the competition’s assistive technology category were announced this
month, including a low cost Braille display and a ‘tongue computer
interface’. We contacted the makers of six of the winning projects, who
told us more about their inventions and how they’re ensuring that the
devices help the people they were intended for.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: Editor’s note.

+01: Remembering Dan Jellinek, one year on.
This month marks one year since Dan Jellinek, e-Access Bulletin’s
much-loved founder and editor, passed away unexpectedly. In that time, a
lot has changed in the rapidly evolving world of digital accessibility, but
our feelings about Dan and sense of loss haven’t changed at all.

As well as Dan’s numerous personal qualities, it’s also crucial to keep
remembering his work and his invaluable accessibility coverage over the
years. His natural ability to find the key stories, ideas and people in the
sector – the ones that were really making a difference – always marked
him out as someone whose insights mattered. They continue to matter today.

My own experience of editing the Bulletin for the past nine months has been
insightful, enjoyable and occasionally challenging, but always incredibly
rewarding – not least because it’s allowed me to further understand the
work that Dan put into it.

But still after one year, I find myself – all-too-frequently – wanting
to share a news lead with Dan that I know he would find exciting, or to ask
his opinion on an angle for a story. It still makes me immensely sad that I
won’t be able to do either of those again, or enjoy any conversation with
him.

Regular readers will also know that the relaunching of the Bulletin in
February was only possible due to Dan’s efforts in securing a future for
it. Without his commitment to keep it going, the Bulletin would not be
around today.

Thank you for reading e-Access Bulletin and supporting the concept that Dan
worked so passionately to uphold: ‘Access to technology for all,
regardless of ability.’

Dan, you’ll always be missed, but certainly never forgotten.

Tristan Parker.


[Section One ends].


++Section Two: News.

+02: New research reveals barriers and solutions to accessibility across
government.

Sifting through an “overwhelming” amount of information and
difficulties in finding out who is tasked with accessibility are two of the
challenges facing teams in UK Government departments when building
accessible digital services, according to research carried out by the
Government Digital Service (GDS).

Speaking in London at an event titled ‘Accessibility in the digital
space’, Alistair Duggin, Head of Accessibility at GDS, gave delegates
(including e-Access Bulletin) a preview of the research results. The event
was organised by the Business Disability Forum (BDF), inviting speakers to
discuss digital accessibility challenges for organisations and end-users,
and the solutions available. In keeping with the theme, Duggin highlighted
key issues that government teams were facing in this area, but also
explained solutions and ideas to help resolve these issues – both based
on the GDS research.

The aim of the research was to find out how different teams across
government are approaching accessibility. The study involved face-to-face
interviews with people in a range of roles across eight government
departments, as well as analysis of existing information.

Findings suggested that teams often do not know who is tasked with making
services accessible for users with disabilities. “The thought is often
that it’s up to a developer,” said Duggin. “Developers do have a huge
responsibility to make things accessible, but they aren’t responsible for
content or design.”

Project managers need to takes on this responsibility, said Duggin:
“[People in these roles] can’t just say, ‘Don’t worry about
accessibility until the end, we’ll get to that bit later.’ That’s
going to cause problems.”

Another issue uncovered in the research was that people become
“overwhelmed’ by the amount of information available. “If you search
for accessibility on the internet, you find lots of information, but a lot
of it is contradictory, so people don’t know where to start,” said
Duggin. He added: “If you look at something like the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines [WCAG], they are really quite impenetrable and
take a huge amount of time to get your head around.”

Other key findings from the research included that people often begin
thinking about accessibility far too late into the lifecycle of a project
– frequently when the project is about to be assessed and tested. “I
guarantee that if that’s the first time you’ve thought about
accessibility, you will find lots of issues … and that’s how
accessibility becomes seen as a burden,” Duggin said.

What is needed is for teams to consider accessibility throughout the
lifecycle of a project, said Duggin: “It makes [accessibility] much
easier, it makes things more efficient, and you’re much more likely to
design something good.”

As well as highlighting problems, the research was also used as a mechanism
for finding solutions to the barriers faced by government teams. One
solution was to provide clarity on what teams are expected to do. “Most
people don’t know what it means to make something accessible,” said
Duggin, “so you need to help people understand what the goal is.”

‘Building empathy’ was another proposed solution. “You can give
people a checklist, but if they haven’t bought-in to why they’re doing
something, they’re not going to embrace it,” said Duggin.

Other solutions included: helping teams to identify accessibility barriers
as early as possible; building accessibility into the templates and
patterns that people regularly use, and; educating, encouraging and
supporting people throughout the process, while avoiding being too critical
or judging people when accessibility problems do arise.

Findings and results from the research will be published soon on the GDS
blog.

Find out more about the Government Digital Service’s accessibility work
at the GDS blog:
http://eab.li/35 .

Read more about the Business Disability Forum and the BDF Technology
Taskforce at the following link:
http://eab.li/36 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/3j .


+03: US Congress called on to create technology equality bill.

The National Council on Disability (NCD) has made a series of
recommendations to the United States Government on making technology more
accessible, including a call to establish a ‘Technology Bill of Rights
for People with Disabilities’.

Other recommendations called for by the NCD (which is tasked with advising
key strands of the US Government on disability policy) include the
following: action should be taken to clarify that the Americans with
Disabilities Act applies to the internet, and; federal agencies in the US
should take “aggressive steps” to comply with a law requiring that
their ICT (information and communications technology) is accessible.

The NCD made the recommendations in ‘National Disability Policy: A
Progress Report’, its annual publication for the White House and
Congress. These reports explore different themes each year, making
recommendations to government on issues that affect the lives of people
with disabilities. Technology was chosen as the focus for the 2016 report,
“because of the potential that it holds to transform how people with
disabilities experience the opportunities of citizenship in our society,”
writes NCD Chairperson Clyde Terry in a letter to US President Barack
Obama, which opens the report.

As well as addressing the US Government, the latest NCD report also makes
recommendations to the technology industry (including encouraging people
with disabilities to participate in user-testing when developing new
products), and both the private and public sectors (including making sure
that procedures for purchasing new technology result in accessible
equipment).

The key recommendation to government is to establish a Technology Bill of
Rights for People with Disabilities. This is needed because of an
“absence of clear language” around organisations’ current obligations
to provide accessible ICT, the report claims.

The bill would clarify the rights of people with disabilities and
“demonstrate how existing legislation applies to ICT and assistive
technology,” claims the report.

The NCD’s plan for creating the bill would involve “creating a Federal
Advisory Committee to draft a Bill of Rights with a budget specifically
authorized by Congress”. This committee would then help to increase both
the supply and demand of accessible ICT systems through targeted work, as
well as expanding technology expertise to assist with policymaking, and
reviewing existing regulations.

Read an executive summary of the key findings from ‘National Disability
Policy: A Progress Report’, in PDF format, at the following link:
http://eab.li/32 .

The full report can be downloaded in document or PDF format from the NCD
website, found at the following link:
http://eab.li/3d .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/3i .


+04: Free online learning course opens up accessibility to all.

An online learning course on digital accessibility, designed by field
experts from a computer science team, has been launched.

‘Digital Accessibility: Enabling Participation in the Information
Society’ is free and open for anyone to enrol on, and no previous
accessibility knowledge is required. The course aims to teach learners how
accessible digital technologies can aid people with a range of impairments,
as well as explaining the universal benefits of inclusive design.

Topics explored on the course include the following: ‘What is Digital
Accessibility and why care?’; ‘Challenges and Barriers met by Disabled
People, including Video and Audio Barriers and Subtitles’; ‘Desktop,
Laptop and Mobile Accessibility’; ‘Digital Accessibility and
Business’; and, ‘Screen Reader, Braille, Switch Access Technologies’.

The ‘Digital Accessibility’ course is classified as a ‘MOOC’ –
massive open online course – a term for online learning programmes with
no limit on the number of people that can study them. So far, around 2,500
people from more than 125 countries have signed up.

Course content has been designed by members of the Web and Internet Science
(WAIS) research group within the Electronics and Computer Science (ECS)
Accessibility Team from the University of Southampton.

The programme is being taught by Mike Wald – a professor at the
University of Southampton leading a team that teaches digital accessibility
– and E.A. Draffan – a senior research fellow and member of the
university’s Electronics and Computer Science team.

Lead educator Mike Wald told e-Access Bulletin that after years of teaching
digital accessibility at the university, the ECS team wanted to find a way
to reach more people. Wald said that the course allows learners to
“explore how a better understanding of users’ needs can enable the
development of technologies that are accessible and provide a more
inclusive environment.”

The course programme runs over five weeks on the Future Learn website, with
approximately three hours per week of study time needed. Although the
official start date was October 17, anyone is free to join at any point, as
learners can study at their own pace and make up the extra time whenever
they choose. Resources also remain available online after the course
finishes. Wald said that he expects the programme to run again in February.

‘Digital Accessibility: Enabling Participation in the Information
Society’ is supported by MOOCAP (MOOC Accessibility Partnership – a
European project that provides education on accessible design) and funded
by the ERASMUS+ grant programme of the European Union.

To sign up for ‘Digital Accessibility: Enabling Participation in the
Information Society’, visit the future Learn website at the link below:
http://eab.li/30 .

Find out more about the MOOC Accessibility Partnership at the project’s
website:
http://eab.li/31 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/3h .


++News in Brief:

+05: Public Sector Progress: European Union-based public sector websites
and mobile apps will be required to be accessible to users with
disabilities, after the European Parliament adopted the provisional
‘Directive on the Accessibility of Websites and Mobile Applications of
Public Sector Bodies’ (see previous coverage from e-Access Bulletin:
http://eab.li/19 ). Once the directive is published in the Official Journal
of the EU, member states will have 21 months to implement the new rules.

Read the directive in PDF format at the following link:
http://eab.li/3k .


+06: Accessible Apple: Technology company Apple has launched an online
portal to inform people about accessibility features in its products. The
new portal was announced at the company’s ‘Apple October’ event, and
allows users to explore and learn about different accessibility functions
(based on differing impairments and needs) across a range of products,
including iPhone, iPad, Apple Watch and Mac.

Find out more at the Apple Accessibility portal:
http://eab.li/3f .


+07: Workplace Tech: Using accessibility champions and performing regular
technology evaluations were some of the suggestions to emerge from an
online dialogue on increasing accessible technology in the workplace. The
discussion was launched by the US-based Partnership on Employment and
Accessible Technology (PEAT), as part of National Disability Employment
Awareness Month. Over 25 ideas were submitted and rated during the
dialogue.

Read the full list of ideas at the PEAT website:
http://eab.li/3c .


[Section Two ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust.
E-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for people
with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust
by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


++Section Three: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all questions, comments and responses to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

+08: Maximising Mobility: Helen Petrie, a Professor of Human Computer
Interaction at the University of York, has a reader request for
participants to take part in a study she is organising. The aim is to find
out more about how people use mobility aids, as she explains:

“Professionals who work with people around their mobility aids, including
doctors, physiotherapists and occupational therapists, say they have little
idea about how people really use these aids when they leave the hospital or
clinic.

“We would like to hear from as many people as possible about their
mobility aids – what they like about them, any problems they have. We
have a survey at the following link: http://eab.li/39 .

“We will also run a detailed study, placing small sensors on
participants’ mobility aids. These sensors will pick up data about how
and when the aid is being used, and we also ask people to answer a few
questions using a smartphone app.

“The study will help us develop the app. Mobility aid users could then
use the app to report problems to a health professional. We will also
create a system for therapists to track information from their clients,
which could help provide more effective treatment.

“Here is the project website: http://eab.li/3a . If anyone would like to
take part or has any questions, please email me on: helen.petrie@york.ac.uk
.”

Further comments, please, to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


+09: Tactile Touring: Rick Williams replies to a reader query from last
month’s Bulletin. In our previous issue, Thomas Bryan from the Blind
Foundation in New Zealand wrote in to ask for advice on making museum and
gallery exhibitions and tours more accessible for people with sight loss.

Rick (who co-designed the Click-Away Pound survey to investigate the online
shopping experience of people with disabilities) has experience in this
area, from his work as Managing Director of disability consultancy Freeney
Williams:

“We developed a free tactile tour for visually impaired people at the
Houses of Parliament in London. This includes a tactile experience and
guided tour of Westminster Hall, Central Lobby, the Lords Chambers in the
House of Lords and the Commons Chamber in the House of Commons. Specially
made models and tactile diagrams are available for visually impaired
visitors, along with trained guides to facilitate the whole experience.”

More information about the tactile tour and booking details can be found at
the following link:
http://eab.li/3b .


+10: More Museums: Another reply to Thomas Bryan’s query on accessible
museums and galleries comes from Waqas Hussain Chauhdry, Managing Director
of DEO, a disability consultancy. Waqas suggests contacting a specific
museum with plenty of accessibility knowledge:

“Regarding the query on making museums accessible, I’d recommend
getting in touch
with the British Museum. They have implemented a number of accessibility
features, both on their website and within the museum. The museum also has
a dedicated
accessibility specialist.”

Further ideas and questions, please, to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


[Section Three ends].


++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.
e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month on The
Early Edition programme. Hear more about the bulletin and upcoming content
appearing in each issue, as we discuss the latest accessible technology
news and readers’ questions with Allan Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts from the RNIB
Connect Radio site. Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via television,
smartphone or radio. Listening details at the following link:
http://eab.li/3e .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website:
http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].


Section Four: Special report.
- The Hackaday Assistive Technology Prize winners.

+11: Hacking for good: winners in their own words.

In July, e-Access Bulletin reported on the Hackaday Prize, a competition
that asks designers, developers and hardware enthusiasts to “build
something that matters” – something that can help people or change the
world for the better.

Of particular interest for Bulletin readers is the Assistive Technology
category. Earlier this month, 20 winning assistive technology projects were
selected from hundreds of entries.

Each received a cash prize of 1,000 US Dollars and moved to the final round
of the competition, where five projects from across all categories will be
chosen November 5. These are awarded larger cash prizes, including the
overall competition winner, who receives $150,000 and a residency in a
design lab to further develop their project.

As you might imagine, the winning entries from the assistive technology
category were a fascinating and accomplished list, showcasing all kinds of
innovative accessibility ideas. e-Access Bulletin contacted a selection of
the winners and asked them to explain more about their projects, which
we’ve detailed below.

Winning project 1: Façade – tactile interfaces to appliances. Designed
by Anhong Guo.

Anhong Guo: “Most common appliances have flat touchpads, making them
inaccessible for blind people. Facade is a crowdsourced fabrication
pipeline to generate 3D printed tactile interfaces for blind people.

“Assisted by the Facade iOS app, blind users capture a photo of an
inaccessible interface, which is sent to crowd workers, who label and
describe it. This is used to generate a 3D model for a layer of tactile
buttons that fit over the controls.

“Blind people generally label appliances with Braille stickers, but doing
so requires sighted assistance. Our solution is an end-to-end pipeline that
can help blind people independently make appliance interfaces accessible.

“I’m glad that this technology is being acknowledged by others, and
I’ll work hard to put it into the hands of blind people.”

Winning project 2: BOSI – a Bluetooth open-source switch interface.
Designed by Joshua Chung.

Joshua Chung: “I believe that using computers and mobile devices is going
to be one of the most frequent daily activities in our life, especially for
students with disabilities, and this should not be a limitation to them.
So, I’ve been looking for cheap, easy solutions that high school students
can build at home or school. The BOSI was designed to be a 3D-printable
computer access device for computers and mobile devices. People who have
difficulties using traditional physical input devices – like a keyboard,
mouse or touch-screen – may benefit from it.

“The BOSI costs much less than commercial switch interfaces and is easy
to make. Also, as BOSI is open-sourced, people with disabilities can modify
and customise it for their individual needs.

“Computer use is going to be a crucial activity in our life and many
people are still struggling with it. I hope this project brings in more
people to face challenges that able-bodied people don’t have now, but may
encounter one day.”

Winning project 3: Shakelet – a wireless vibrating wristband to provide
alerts to hearing impaired people. Designed by Alex Hunt.

Alex Hunt: “The inspiration came from a friend who has hearing
difficulties. I wanted to make something that would allow her to interact
with standard consumer technology without requiring expensive, specialised
equipment.

“The Shakelet consists of a sensor and a receiver. The sensor is placed
on whatever the user wishes to monitor, such as a doorbell or fire alarm.
When that item goes off, a signal is sent to the receiver, notifying the
user through a flashing light and vibrating motor. The project is unique
because there is no specialist equipment required, and it has a very low
component cost.”

“Being a Hackaday winner was fantastic and surprising. The standard of
entries was very high and I was amazed to have been chosen. The next stage
is to shrink the sensor to a size that can be integrated into a wristband.
I would also like to add a Wi-Fi interface.”

Winning project 4: MOLBED – a modular low cost Braille electronic
display. Designed by Marin Davide.

Marin Davide: “I decided to develop an affordable alternative to current
(expensive) refreshable Braille displays. It had to be low cost and easy to
manufacture, if possible using commercial parts. I’m in touch with
associations for people with impaired vision, and their help is important
to design a product that is really useful.

“This project is unique because I used a new idea (a magnetic core with
magnetic retaining on each end) that has never been used in a Braille
display. It has a working prototype already, and the entire project is
open-source, as I decided not to patent it, so that it is available for
anyone to make.

“Here in Italy, it is difficult to get funds for this kind of project, so
winning prize money gives this project the opportunity to be developed
fully – having test units made, optimised, tested by users, and then
produced in a first batch.”

Winning project 5: Pallette – an open-source ‘tongue computer
interface’. Designed by Dan Levine, Joanna Zhang, Oliver Hoffman, Rohit
Jain, and Shawn Bramson.

Dan Levine: “We felt like the technology of today is functional, but
often doesn’t consider appearance or obtrusiveness of a device.
Tongue-based interaction, and the idea of discreet assistive technologies,
can meaningfully help out.

“Hidden from view, Pallette enables people with spinal cord injuries and
other mobility impairments to control technology using their tongue. It
uses infrared sensors to track tongue motion and a microphone to detect
tongue taps. It currently enables individuals to control computers, Android
tablets, and Android phones as a Bluetooth mouse.

“The tongue interface has been explored before, but we’ve given it some
new abilities and form. Pallette doesn’t require any buttons, meaning the
tongue doesn’t get tired. It’s open-source and we have a website
detailing how to make it – this is definitely a first for tongue
interfaces. As far as we know, there are no commercial or other open-source
tongue interfaces that exist today.

“We’re humbled and proud to have won. We’ve been working on Pallette
for the last one-and-a-half years, and we really want to see it thrive and
reach the people it’s meant for. It feels like a good beginning as we
work to kick-start this community.”

Winning project 6: TNS B1i – an accessible prosthetic hand. Designed by
Giovanni Leal and Jenny Pabon.

Giovanni Leal: “The hand opens and closes, makes gestures and lasts one
week with a specific battery. It’s designed for people with transradial
upper limb amputation. Just to change one person’s life would mean the
world to us.

“Everybody is fixated on the fact that the hand only has four fingers –
and we love it! We were worried about people’s reaction to it, but having
four fingers on the hand really makes sense. Also, we built our own 3D
printed microlinear actuators, making us independent from suppliers.

“We’re humbled to be a winner. The community [around the competition]
is amazing. They praise you, give you advice and help you become a better
maker.

“The goal is for the hand to be commercially available in December. We
have a patent going on, but if anyone wants to make the hand to help
another person, feel free and call us so we can see it afterwards and learn
from your kindness.”

The overall winners of the competition will be announced at the Hackaday
Superconference on November 5. More information can be found at the
following link:
http://eab.li/3m .

Read about other winners in the Assistive Technology category:
http://eab.li/37 .

Find out more at the Hackaday Prize website:
http://eab.li/38 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/3g .


[Section Four ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

Copyright 2016 Headstar Ltd.
E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor
when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:
Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 183 ends.]


--

This message was sent to nfreear@yahoo.co.uk by eaccess@lists.headstar.com

To forward this message, please do not use the forward button of your
email application, because this message was made specifically for you only.
Instead use the forward page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=forward&uid=8853df643ffa0a489fcaf5869c781942&mid=89>
in our newsletter system.

To change your details and to choose which lists to be subscribed to,
visit your personal preferences page
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=preferences&uid=8853df643ffa0a489fcaf5869c781942>

Or you can opt-out completely
<https://lists.headstar.com//?p=unsubscribe&uid=8853df643ffa0a489fcaf5869c781942>
from all future mailings.




-- powered by phpList, www.phplist.com --
