
++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 192, August 2017.

For HTML and text versions of all previous e-Access Bulletin issues,
please visit the Bulletin Archive at the following link:
http://eab.li/6a .

Thanks to Dr. Nick Freear for maintaining the Bulletin Archive.

e-Access Bulletin is produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up page below:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email questions, comments, article ideas and news leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .

++Issue 192 contents.

Section One: News. 01: New app helps to combat poor customer service
faced by people with disabilities. - System gives staff specialist
impairment info and customer arrival time.

02: Housing help tips, podcasts and lifelines for people with sight loss,
collected online. - New portal offers resources on renting, buying and
independent living.

03: Talking ATMs launched at all branches of major UK bank. - Santander
rolls out the audio assistive machines across UK network.

News in Brief: 04: Inclusive Mapping – Google’s call for crowdsourced
access info; 05: Rewarding Braille – “World’s first multi-line digital
Braille reader”; 06: Accessible Gaming Ask – Academic journal calls for
perspectives and papers.

Section Two: Interview. – Penny Melville-Brown OBE. 07: Baking Blind – an
online and global adventure. Penny Melville-Brown’s dream was to take her
online cooking project around the world. Now, after entering and winning
a huge competition, she’s getting the chance to do just that and she’ll
be sharing her adventures via YouTube, a blog and social media. E-Access
Bulletin caught up with her to ask about the role that technology will
play in this grand trip.

[Contents ends].

++Section One: News.

+01: New app helps to combat poor customer service faced by people with
disabilities.

A new app-based system has been launched that aims to “shake up” the
customer service industry across shops, banks and other venues.

The Welcome app lets people with disabilities tell shops and venues of
their arrival, so that staff can provide tailored assistance suited to
their condition.

Designed by assistive technology company Neatebox, the free app is a
two-way platform between users and customer service teams. Users tell
staff, via the app, that they will be visiting a venue and flag up useful
information or specific requirements they have, such as needing
assistance with a wheelchair or that they will be bringing a guide dog.

GPS tracking lets staff know exactly when the customer arrives, and the
app also provides links to useful information about various impairments,
supplied by charities and specialist organisations; the Royal National
Institute of Blind People (RNIB) and Guide Dogs have both provided
information for the app.

The system only works with venues that have signed-up, but users are
encouraged to request new venues within the app. Neatebox founder Gavin
Neate told e-Access Bulletin that a “massive part” of the system is the
team approaching venues identified by the user community: “I guarantee
that if someone downloads the app now and requests a venue they would
like to see using it, we will contact that venue within a week at most,”
Neate said.

Venues that have signed up so far include Edinburgh Airport, hotels,
shops, cafes, tourist attractions and the Royal Bank of Scotland, where
the app has been installed at the company’s headquarters in the hope of
demonstrating its benefits for more widespread use.

At present, venues are mainly in Scotland, where Neatebox is based, but
users can request locations anywhere. Requests have been received for
venues in Northern Ireland, Devon and London, as well as the United
States, Canada and New Zealand. The app isn’t yet available outside of
the UK, but this isn’t being ruled out.

Neate said that he believes Welcome can “shake up” customer services.
“With more and more older people and people with specific needs,
industries need to seriously look at the service they provide.  Whether
industries are aware of it or not, they have a whole new world coming
towards them,” Neate said.

A former guide dog mobility instructor, Neate started Neatebox to help
find a solution for problems that some of his visually impaired clients
had when operating pedestrian crossings. This solution became Button, a
system that allows a user’s mobile phone to automatically ‘push’ buttons
at pedestrian crossings as they approach, using Bluetooth. This
simplifies the process for those who may find it difficult to operate the
crossings – for example, someone who is blind or using a wheelchair.

Crossings need to have simple hardware installed in them for the Button
system to work, but as with the Welcome app, users can request locations
and Neatebox will contact requested local authorities. The company is
already working with some councils to install the technology. The system
has already been installed throughout the town of Largs, on the West
Coast of Scotland.

To download the Welcome app and find out more, visit the Neatebox
website:
http://eab.li/7h .
https://neatebox.com/ .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/7o .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1375 .

+02: Housing help tips, podcasts and lifelines for people with sight
loss, collected online.

A new online housing guide for people with sight loss has been launched,
collecting together existing resources, advice and podcasts to help
people in a range of situations.

The free guide has been created by sight loss charity Thomas Pocklington
Trust, as a comprehensive portal for visually impaired people who are
looking for a new home or experiencing housing issues.

Users are linked to relevant information depending on their circumstances –
for example, people seeking information on independent living, people
whose homes need repairs, and those facing homelessness or eviction.

A wide range of topics are covered, including advice on renting and
buying a home, resources to help with household tasks, local authority
support, and a housing ‘jargon buster’.

Imogen Blood, co-author of the guide, told e-Access Bulletin that people
with sight loss face a number of issues around housing. She said: “The
process of finding housing and moving home can throw up a number of
practical challenges for a person with sight loss: from getting
accessible versions of tenancy agreements to thinking about where you
will exercise your guide dog. Meanwhile there is a lack of clarity around
whether and how you might be able to access social housing with a visual
impairment, or use disability benefits to pay a mortgage.”

One section of the guide focuses on technology that can aid independent
living, such as smartphone apps. More information on this topic can be
found in Thomas Pocklington Trust’s Assistive and Inclusive Home
Technology guide, covered in e-Access Bulletin’s July 2016 issue:
http://eab.li/7b .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1208 .

Blood said that she was struck by the difficulty in finding useful online
housing information for people with sight loss, and wanted to bring
together relevant information in one place.

It was important to create a digital publication to reach more people,
Blood said: “Putting the guide online will get this information out as
widely as possible, to people who might not typically come into contact
with some services,” she said.

Links to audio podcasts recorded by Thomas Pocklington Trust are also
included in the guide, for users to stream or download. The podcasts
feature people with sight loss talking about housing issues that have
affected them. Speaking about the making of these podcasts, Blood said:
“As we developed the guide, it struck us that many people we spoke to
could benefit from hearing each other’s stories.”

She continued: “I met visually impaired people who had jumped around
private sector tenancies as much as their sighted peers, but I also meet
younger people whose confidence about independent living was very low.
They seemed genuinely inspired to hear that living in your own place with
a partner was even an option for someone with a visual impairment.”

The online housing guide for people with sight loss is available at
Thomas Pocklington Trust’s website, at the following link:
http://eab.li/7c .
http://pocklington-trust.org.uk/guide-finding-home-visually-impaired-people1/ .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: http://eab.li/7n .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1381 .

+03: Talking ATMs launched at all branches of major UK bank.

Santander has announced talking ATMs for blind and visually impaired
customers across all of its UK branches.

Many banks offer talking ATMs at some branches, but Santander’s move
makes it the first bank to offer the service at every one of its UK
outlets – around 1,400. In May, HSBC launched 1,500 talking cash machines
around its UK branch network.

To use the service, customers can plug earphones into a socket on the
front of the ATM, and voice assistance will then guide them through
operating the machine. Users can also choose whether to use the ATM
screen during the process for some functions (for example, if they are
partially sighted and can see some information on-screen) or not at all.
Staff in the branches will give out headphones to customers who don’t
have their own.

Santander worked with the Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB)
and the Digital Accessibility Centre to design the service.

Read more about talking ATMs at the RNIB website: http://eab.li/7g .
http://rnib.org.uk/campaigning-current-campaigns-accessible-information-campaign/talking-cash-machines .

To find out which banks have talking ATMs, search the Link ATM Locator
tool, which gives users a map of cash machines in an area and lists
facilities, including audio assistance and wheelchair access:
http://eab.li/7k .
http://www.link.co.uk/atm-locator .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/7m .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1379 .

++News in Brief:

+04: Inclusive Mapping: Google Maps users can now add in a range of
wheelchair access information to venue listings on maps using an Android
smartphone. Details that users can add include whether a building’s
entrance, lift, bathroom and parking area are wheelchair-friendly. The
information can then be seen by other people using Google Maps.

Read more at the official Google blog:
http://eab.li/7d .
https://www.blog.google/products/maps/building-map-everyone/ .

+05: Rewarding Braille: The makers of what is claimed to be “the world’s
first multiple-line digital Braille e-reader” – featuring 360 cells split
over 40 characters per line over nine lines – were announced as the
winners of the Accessibility Award in the AbilityNet Tech4Good Awards
2017. The Canute Braille reader has been designed by not-for-profit
social enterprise Bristol Braille and is planned for release in late 2017
or early 2018, with an estimated price of between £600-£800.

Read more about the Canute Braille reader at AbilityNet’s website:
http://eab.li/7q .
https://abilitynet.org.uk/news-blogs/worlds-first-multi-line-braille-e-reader-blind-people-wins-coveted-abilitynet-tech4good .

+06: Accessible Gaming Ask: Academic publication The Computer Games
Journal has issued a call for papers and information on accessible
gaming, ahead of a special issue on the topic in 2018. Dr Michael Heron
(from the School of Computing Science and Digital Media at Robert Gordon
University in Scotland) will be the guest editor and has sent out an
early request for perspectives and contributions from academics,
industry, students, accessibility researchers and advocates, and “those
with direct experience of inaccessibility.” Submission details below.

Read more and find out how to submit contributions on accessible gaming
at the Meeple Like Us gaming design website:
http://eab.li/7r .
http://meeplelikeus.co.uk/computer-games-journal-special-issue-accessibility-gaming-call-papers/ .

[Section One ends].

++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust.

E-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of
Thomas Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change
for people with sight loss. Find out more about the work of
Thomas Pocklington Trust by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].

++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.

e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month on
The Early Edition programme. Hear more about the bulletin and upcoming
content appearing in each issue, as we discuss the latest accessible
technology news and readers’ questions with Allan Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts from the RNIB
Connect Radio site. Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via
television, smartphone or radio. Listening details at the following link:
http://eab.li/3e .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website:
http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].

++Section Two: Interview. – Penny Melville-Brown OBE.

+07: Baking Blind – an online and global adventure.

Cooking is yet another daily task that many people take for granted.
Having sight loss can make cooking incredibly difficult, but Penny
Melville-Brown OBE – disability rights advocate and Director of
Disability Dynamics – wanted to show the world otherwise.

Baking Blind is her YouTube channel and online project, featuring videos
of Penny – who is blind – preparing all manner of dishes, from curries to
quails’ eggs to Turkish delight.

Earlier this year, Penny entered the Holman Prize, a competition run by
San Francisco’s LightHouse for the Blind and Visually Impaired
organisation to fund big ideas and innovative projects pitched by people
who are blind. Penny’s ambition was to take her online cookery project
around the world, cooking across the globe and filming it as she went.

After progressing through the competition, Penny was recently announced
as one of the three winners to receive funding. Her global dream is about
to become a reality and audiences will be able to follow her travels and
exotic recipes through the Baking Blind YouTube channel.

E-Access Bulletin chatted with Penny to find out how video, social media
and other technology helped her in the Holman Prize and how she plans to
use these platforms in the next stages of her grand trip.

E-Access Bulletin: Please tell us a bit about Baking Blind:
Penny Melville-Brown: “I’ve been working in the disability employment field
for nearly 20 years and it is abundantly clear we aren’t going to succeed
unless employers change their attitudes. We need to change their hearts
and minds. I thought that cookery might be a great way, as I do lots of
cooking, and food programmes get so much attention. I was cooking about
50 mini-Christmas cakes last December for gifts and my brother had time
to spare to shoot the videos – and Baking Blind was born!”

- What was your goal if you did win the Holman Prize?
“My goal was to take Baking Blind around the world to cook with professional
chefs and home cooks, sighted or not, to create a year’s worth of videos and
show that blindness, and any other disability, doesn’t cramp our ambitions,
capabilities or zest for life. I’ll be cooking in America, Costa Rica,
China, Australia and Africa, and I have a full programme of activities
when I get back to the UK.”

- What part did technology play for you in the competition?
“I entered by providing a 90-second video called ‘A Taste of the World’.
I’ve also been using social media and email to gather all the support I
need for my travels.”

- Video is obviously key in making and sharing Baking Blind. What
  challenges and benefits are there to working with video and YouTube?
“Obviously I can’t shoot the videos (although I am trying to develop
some ability with a headcam) and nor can I edit, although I do make
editorial decisions based on the recorded sounds/voices. Managing
YouTube doesn’t work for me either. But nowadays, one has to use all
forms of modern media and technology to have any reach and impact – so
as a team, we are trying hard.”

- How did it feel to be one of the winners of the prize?
“Actually, it was very difficult, as I knew before the formal announcement
and it was tricky to keep my excitement controlled. Now, several weeks
later, I am beginning to realise how very international the project has
become, with emails, messages, social media and much more from all over
the world. What is absolutely clear is that being able to access all
these different forms of communication is essential for this type of
project.”

- Tell us about the project you’re now planning:
“I’ll spend a week in San Francisco with the LightHouse team and then a few
days cooking there, before flying to Tamarindo in Costa Rica. I’m spending
a week there in a jungle culinary adventure restaurant. After that, I’ll
be in Virginia Beach, cooking with local people and meeting up with a
colleague from the Women’s Royal Naval Service, with whom I’ve had no
contact for nearly 40 years – the power of social media!

“Soon after that, I’m jetting off to Chongqing in China to cook with and
help the Rotary Club there with a project supporting local visually
impaired people. Then to Kiama and Melbourne in Australia with a bevy of
different cooks, before Lilongwe in Malawi where I’ve linked with local
groups with visual impairments. Back in the UK, I’m planning a range of
activities to reinforce my naval links with the Holman Prize, plus baking
with different local people.”

- What part will technology play in the project?
“I’m aiming to produce at least one video a week for 12 months, plus a blog
and social media. There’s no doubt that this whole project would not have
been possible without being able to contact a worldwide audience.
Before I started, I only had one possible contact in Australia – all the
others simply responded to my emails and videos.”

- What’s next for you after that trip?
“I’d love to continue as a flag-bearer for blind and disabled people over the
world. With the right adjustments we can do most jobs, contribute to our
communities and be as independent, fulfilled and ambitious as anyone else.”

Find more information and Penny’s cooking videos at the Baking Blind
website:
http://eab.li/7i .
http://www.bakingblind.com/ .

Find out more about Penny’s work on disability and employment at the
Disability Dynamics website:
http://eab.li/7j .
http://www.disabilitydynamics.co.uk/index.htm .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/7l .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1377 .

[Section Two ends]

++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link
underneath the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s
‘forward’ button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive: http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform
the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin
may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:

Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek
Accessibility Advisor: Dr. Nick Freear

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 192 ends.]
