++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 191, June 2017.

For HTML and text versions of all previous e-Access Bulletin issues,
please visit the Bulletin Archive at the following link:
http://eab.li/6a .
Thanks to Dr. Nick Freear for maintaining the Bulletin Archive.

e-Access Bulletin is produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington
Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link
underneath the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s
‘forward’ button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up
page below:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email questions, comments, article ideas and news leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .

++Issue 191 contents.

Section One: News. 01: Evolving technologies won’t automatically empower
people, says Paralympian. - Lord Holmes on assistive tech opportunities
and Tokyo 2020 accessibility.

02: Research uncovers ‘the real digital divide’ facing millions in the
UK. - Digital exclusion needs to be ‘redefined,’ says research author.

03: New guidance helps recruiters dodge digital accessibility pitfalls. -
Advice on making the job application process inclusive.

News in Brief: 04: Feedback That Matters – ‘TripAdvisor for disability
services’; 05: A Winning Translation – e-Access Bulletin content in
French; 06: Inclusive Movie-Making – Film festival winning entries
announced.

Section Two: European report – The European e-Accessibility Forum. 07:
Opening up digital culture. E-accessible culture was the theme for the
2017 European e-Accessibility Forum, held in Paris earlier this month.
E-Access Bulletin reports from the event, exploring how cultural spaces
and projects are being made more inclusive through technology, including
sessions on musical instrument design, alternative format books and
museum websites.

[Contents ends].

++Section One: News.

+01: Evolving technologies won’t automatically empower people, says
Paralympian.

Advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence have huge potential
to empower assistive technology users, but we cannot simply wait for this
to happen, a renowned Paralympian and member of the House of Lords has
said.

In an opening speech at the Assistive Technology Exhibition and
Conference (ATEC) in London earlier this month, Lord Chris Holmes told
delegates that these technologies must be harnessed in the right way.

Using the ‘Internet of Things’, artificial intelligence, ‘big data’ and
robotics as examples, Holmes said: “All of these technologies are neutral
when it comes to accessibility. They can have such a transformative
impact, but it won’t just happen as a matter of course. They could just
exacerbate existing patterns and structures of exclusion.”

Holmes claimed that technology provides a “phenomenal opportunity” to
enable people in education, employment and through social inclusion, but
also that these processes will not just evolve automatically. He said:
“It’s as much down to politicians, policy-makers and government to lead
on so much of this if we’re going to realise the opportunities that
exist.”

Holmes also revealed that the newly formed All-Party Parliamentary Group
for Assistive Technology (APPGAT – read more in e-Access Bulletin’s
previous APPGAT coverage: http://eab.li/6v ) will soon be launching its
first enquiry. Holmes, who is a co-chair of the group, said it would be
“a great focal point for parliamentarians from all parties, a chance for
them to focus on getting people into [assistive technology] who’ve never
considered it.”

During his time as an athlete, Holmes won 15 Paralympic medals for
swimming, nine of them gold. In his speech to ATEC delegates in London,
he discussed the evolution of assistive technology and how it provided an
invaluable lifeline to him growing up and in his swimming training, after
he suddenly and unexpectedly lost his sight at 14-years-old.

Speaking about the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, Holmes
explained how in-ear audio description devices designed for visually
impaired spectators quickly became popular with all visitors,
demonstrating the benefits of universal design. Accessibility and
inclusion were “hardwired” throughout the 2012 games, he said.

This kind of innovative thinking will continue at the 2020 Tokyo Olympic
and Paralympic Games, said Holmes, who visited technology labs in Tokyo
to find out more about accessibility measures at the event. Holmes said:
“What they’re currently working on and what will be showcased and
rolled-out in 2020 will be quite sensational. In terms of mobility,
communication, translation and every element of the games – it’s not just
technology that’s being thought of, but assistive technology.”

Read more about Lord Chris Holmes at his website:
http://eab.li/75 .

Read more about the Assistive Technology Exhibition and Conference at the
ATEC website:
http://eab.li/6w .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/79 .

+02: Research uncovers ‘the real digital divide’ facing millions in
the UK.

Fresh data has shown further evidence of the digital gulf in the UK
facing millions of people with disabilities and older people.

A report by digital inclusion charity Good Things Foundation and
Professor Simeon Yates, titled ‘The real digital divide?’, examines the
demographics of people in the UK who never or rarely use the internet.
The report is based on (and builds on) a 2015 report from
telecommunications regulatory body Ofcom on ‘Adults’ media use and
attitudes’.

In terms of usage, the research found that 15.2 million people in the UK
were found to be either ‘non-users’ (defined as people who have no
internet access or don’t use the internet even if they have access) or
‘limited users’ (people who rarely and infrequently go online).

47.7% of the ‘non-user’ group were found to have “a long-standing
illness, disability or infirmity,” representing around 3.7 million people
in the UK. This compares to previous data from the Office for National
Statistics, which found that 22% of disabled adults in the UK have never
used the internet.

Age was also a key factor in non-use. 64.4% of non-users in the report
are aged 65 or over, with 25.3% aged between 65-74 and 39.1% aged over
75.

Looking at the ‘limited users’ group, 47.4% reported having a disability
or poor health, representing 3.5 million people. The report also state
that: “Age is again a clear indicator of limited use, although not quite
as marked as for non-users.” 18.5% of the ‘limited users’ group are aged
65-74, and 18.8% of the group are aged over 75.

Tom French, Research and Data Manager at Good Things Foundation, who led
the report writing, told e-Access Bulletin that further work is necessary
to explore the reasons behind non or limited internet use among people
with disabilities and older people. He said: “We need to commit to
exploring this link so that we can influence government and digital
leaders to truly embrace accessibility.”

Discussing what can be done to increase internet usage among these
groups, French said: “Sustained support at a trusted community and peer
level is essential. We recognise that basic digital skills pave the way
for internet use, but we need to ensure that all types of use are catered
for and that we support people to take advantage of the full breadth of
benefits … The key finding [from the report] for us is that digital
exclusion needs to be redefined as the digital landscape evolves, and is
much, much wider than simply assessing whether someone has access to the
internet (or devices) and whether they have online skills.”

Download ‘The real digital divide?’ (in PDF format) from the Good Things
Foundation website:
http://eab.li/6z .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/78 .

+03: New guidance helps recruiters dodge digital accessibility pitfalls.

A guide on recruitment and digital accessibility has been released,
aiming to help companies and organisations ensure that their digital
resources are inclusive for all applicants when searching and applying
for jobs.

The Accessible Recruitment Guide has been produced by Media Access
Australia, a non-profit digital accessibility organisation. Designed
primarily for HR staff, the guide aims to offer “real world guidance” on
digital recruitment resources.

A ‘digital accessibility checklist’ in the guide suggests a number of
areas to consider, which will benefit applicants with a wide range of
impairments, including those who are blind or visually impaired, and
those who are deaf. These areas include: accessible document templates;
requesting knowledge of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)
2.0 for roles involving content creation; advertising jobs through
accessible websites, intranets and social media platforms; and providing
an online audiovisual alternative to telephone interviews, such as Skype.

There are also tips on making recruitment videos accessible, such as
adding captions and audio description.

To ensure that these measures are effective and that the recruitment
process is a fully inclusive one, the guide suggests undertaking
user-testing with users that have a disability.

The final section of the guide lists other useful tools for recruiters,
including several Media Access Australia resources (guides on social
media accessibility and accessible technology in the workplace) and a
‘colour contrast analyser’ from accessibility consultancy The Paciello
Group.

Register to download the accessible recruitment guide at the Media Access
Australia website:
http://eab.li/6y .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/77 .

++News in Brief:

+04: Feedback That Matters: An Australian website that collects
user-ratings and reviews has been called ‘TripAdvisor for disability
support services’. The Clickability site encourages users to leave
feedback on different care and support services across Australia (in
categories including housing, software and apps, and home help), which
others can then view. The aim behind the site is to help people with
disabilities choose the best service available with the budget allocated
to them through the Australian Government’s National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS).

Read more at the Clickability website:
http://eab.li/72 :

+05: A Winning Translation: A recent e-Access Bulletin feature on EU
accessibility legislation has been translated into French and published
on a web accessibility blog, Tanaguru. Written by Carine Marzin (a
consultant and member of the European Disability Forum ICT Expert Group),
the article was translated by digital accessibility consultant Frédéric
Halna. The translated article has also been highlighted on the website of
a French Government department, the Ministry of Ecological and Inclusive
Transition.

Read the French translation of the article on the Tanaguru blog (can be
toggled to English language):
http://eab.li/73 .

Read the original article on e-Access Bulletin Live: http://eab.li/6o .

+06: Inclusive Movie-Making: Three winning entries of a short film
competition about living with a disability can be watched online in full.
The films were chosen as part of the Business Disability Forum’s (BDF)
Technology Taskforce Film Festival, which gave students and graduates 72
hours to make a film about the experience of searching and applying for
jobs with a disability. The winning film, ‘Big Day’, follows Jake, who is
deaf, as he begins a new job as an app developer. All three films have
audio description and can be viewed at the BDF website, linked to below.

Read more about the film festival and watch the winning entries at the
BDF website:
http://eab.li/74 .

[Section One ends].

++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust. E-Access Bulletin is brought to you
with the kind support of Thomas Pocklington Trust, a national charity
delivering positive change for people with sight loss. Find out more
about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].

++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin. e-Access Bulletin
will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month on The Early Edition
programme. Hear more about the bulletin and upcoming content appearing in
each issue, as we discuss the latest accessible technology news and
readers’ questions with Allan Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts from the RNIB
Connect Radio site. Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via
television, smartphone or radio. Listening details at the following link:
http://eab.li/3e .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website: http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].

++Section Two: European report. - The European e-Accessibility Forum.

+07: Opening up digital culture.

Just as digital accessibility picks up more and more mainstream interest,
certain topics within the accessibility field also begin gathering
momentum. One such topic is accessible culture. Clearly, this can mean
many things, but in this case it refers to cultural spaces (such as
museums and art galleries), projects and resources being made more
inclusive through digital technology.

For some people, this has already been a focal point for years, perhaps
through employment, personal interest or just frustration at the lack of
accessibility within these areas.

Earlier this month, the eleventh European e-Accessibility Forum sought to
explore this vast subject with its theme of ‘e-accessible culture’. Held
in Paris at the Cité des sciences et de l’Industrie, the event was
organised by French non-profit BrailleNet, an organisation that works
towards improving digital accessibility.

BrailleNet’s director Alex Bernier was one of the speakers, alongside a
host of other accessibility professionals and representatives from
various cultural institutions.

Here is e-Access Bulletin’s report from the Forum, covering talks and
workshops from across the event.

In a session entitled ‘Building inclusive cultural services from the
bottom up’, Sandrine Sophys-Veret from the French Ministry of Culture and
Communication spoke about the Ministry’s efforts to increase cultural
access through technology.

One example given was a robotic device being trialled. These devices help
visitors with a mobility impairment view exhibits on inaccessible floors
in museums or galleries. Visitors control the robot remotely from a
different floor and view a video feed from a camera attached to the
robot.

Future projects from the Ministry include an ‘accessibility barometer’ to
measure the online accessibility levels of arts and culture websites, and
a ‘hackathon’ to inspire new cultural projects.

Sophys-Veret explained that in the Ministry’s efforts to help create a
“universal and inclusive” society, “no single tool can be the response.”
She also spoke about accessible books, stating that “access to [these]
books is a colossal issue.”

Exploring this theme in more depth were Jesper Klein (from the Swedish
Agency for Accessible Media and the DAISY Consortium) and Alex Bernier,
Director of BrailleNet.

Klein spoke about ‘Producing and distributing accessible e-books: the
Swedish model’. He began by talking about the ‘book famine’, referring to
the severe lack of accessible format books for people with print
disabilities. Although reading is still an important and popular cultural
activity, over 90% of all printed materials are not available in
accessible formats, Klein said.

The DAISY Consortium has been working to end the book famine, and after
exploring some of the Consortium’s work, Klein spoke about Legimus, a
Swedish digital library and app that serves people with print
disabilities. Legimus has 120,000 accessible books and 75,000 active
users in Sweden.

He said that although the core principles behind accessible reading
(people with a print disability should be able to read the same titles as
anyone else, at the same time, through the same distribution channels and
at the same costs) have not been achieved yet, new technologies are
making a lot of progress.

Klein said: “The tide is turning. Inclusion of people with print
disabilities and accessible reading are moving into the mainstream,
fast.” He finished by predicting that libraries serving people with print
disabilities will offer more specialised services and titles in future,
as mainstream outlets will begin offering well-known and popular books in
accessible formats.

Alex Bernier spoke about the emergence of accessible publishing,
including OPALINe, a project that aims to drive forward the production of
accessible format books. He also presented some of the issues facing the
industry.

Bernier said: “The industry receives very little financial support and it
is fragmented. We have to find new ways to cooperate.” Replication of
labour is also a problem, he said: “In France, a lot of the same books
are being adapted [for accessible formats], especially schoolbooks.”
Bernier claimed that a new collaborative publishing platform is being
developed to tackle this issue. The tool will help divide up and record
work, to avoid repetition.

Elsewhere, a session on ‘celebrating diversity and driving creativity
through digital technologies’ unearthed some fantastic innovations.
Gawain Hewitt of Drake Music spoke about the organisation’s experimental
musical instrument design with disabled musicians, using the example of
the Mi.Mu Gloves, a wearable musical technology that offers the wearer a
range of control and production tools.

The Mi.Mu Gloves proved invaluable to Kris Halpin, a disabled musician
that Hewitt and Drake Music had been working with, giving Halpin “a new
lease of performing life,” Hewitt said.

Similarly, Hewitt helped James Rose – a conductor with limited mobility
who conducts primarily by moving his head – with a new design for his
conducting baton, by ‘hacking’ a pair Rose’s glasses and attaching a
baton and electrical fitting to the side of the glasses.

“Good design can remove the barriers faced by disabled musicians and
allow them to succeed on their own terms,” Hewitt said.

An afternoon session titled ‘From the visual to the textual – describing
the arts in a digital world’ featured Lauren Trimble from ITHAKA, a
non-profit platform that hosts digital academic databases. Trimble
explained how some of these databases have been building accessibility
into their digital archives.

One example used was JSTOR, a cloud-based library hosting journals,
books, images and other content. Trimble explained that improving JSTOR’s
accessibility meant meeting WCAG (the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines) 2.0 requirements – a process which Trimble had long
understood the benefits of, and helped steer JSTOR towards achieving.
JSTOR is now rated at level ‘AA’ for WCAG compliance and has developed a
process for fixing archived content that was previously inaccessible for
visually impaired users.

Trimble concluded with the following observations: “We should be making
decisions from the user’s perspective, as opposed to what we think the
user should want or need. If it turns out that anything we try is not
best serving the intended community, we’ll go where that community is and
make our products better from their perspective.”

Following on was Matthew Cock, CEO of the VocalEyes charity, which
provides audio description services in theatres, museums and galleries.
He discussed a VocalEyes project that audited 1,700 UK museum websites,
to examine the online access information provided on these sites.

Cock explained that the study was based on the theory that a lack of
access information for disabled visitors will mean lower attendance at
that museum. He said: “Using a website is a vital step in the
decision-making process for many people. Without answers to key access
questions beforehand, people are less likely to visit.”

The study found that 27% of UK museums have no access information on
their website, and a further 43% have some access information, but make
no mention of visually impaired people. “That’s 70% of museums that are
not catering for blind or partially sighted people,” Cock said.

Reflecting on the forum after a day of thought-provoking talks, it seems
that e-accessible culture is finally being pushed, gradually, into the
spotlight. Though some sessions uncovered a worrying lack of accessible
cultural practices, suggestions and solutions were also offered to
attempt to fix the situation.

Sometimes these solutions were based around innovative new technologies,
sometimes simply through better use of existing technologies. Either way,
let’s hope these solutions are taken on board, fully opening up cultural
spaces, projects and resources to a far wider audience.

Read more about the European e-Accessibility Forum at the event website:
http://eab.li/6x .

Find out more about BrailleNet (French language website):
http://eab.li/71 .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/76 .

[Section Two ends]

++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com . Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link
underneath the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s
‘forward’ button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive: http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform
the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin
may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited: http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:

Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek
Accessibility Advisor: Dr. Nick Freear

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 191 ends.]
