
++E-ACCESS BULLETIN Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 190, May 2017.

An HTML version of this issue of e-Access Bulletin is available at the
following link: http://eab.li/6b .

For HTML and text versions of all previous e-Access Bulletin issues, please
visit the Bulletin Archive at the following link: http://eab.li/6a . Thanks
to Dr. Nick Freear for maintaining the Bulletin Archive.

e-Access Bulletin is produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up page below:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email questions, comments, article ideas and news leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website: http://www.headstar.com/ten .

++Issue 190 contents.

Section One: News.
01: A “tax on accessible books”: mixed emotions at
Marrakesh Treaty progress. - EU agreement reached, but with a compromise on
‘compensation schemes’.

02: New accessible ATM app points users in the right direction. - Locator
app tracks down cash machines designed for visually impaired users.

03: ‘Smart cities’ are not inclusive – but they can be, new research
claims. - Emerging city tech represents huge opportunity for citizens with
disabilities.

News in Brief: 04: Tokyo Standards – Paralympic and Olympic accessibility
guidelines; 05: Cultural Shift – e-Accessible culture at European Forum;
06: Airborne Inclusion – New in-flight entertainment system launched.

Section Two: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.
07: iPlayer Access – Navigating an audio description service.

Section Three: Analysis – EU accessibility legislation.
08: Keeping the public sector accessible.

An EU directive to make public sector websites and mobile apps more
accessible could help 80 million European citizens with a disability.
Carine Marzin – Consultant and Member of the European Disability Forum ICT
Expert Group – delves into the details of the directive and explains how it
can help open up digital content for a huge amount of people.

[Contents ends].

++Section One: News.

+01: A “tax on accessible books”: mixed emotions at Marrakesh Treaty
progress.

The latest agreement in the process of implementing the Marrakesh Treaty,
which aims to help end the ‘book famine’ faced by blind and visually
impaired people, has been met with a mixture of praise and frustration.

The treaty aims to increase the availability of books in accessible
formats, such as Braille and e-books, by relaxing copyright laws which make
it difficult or time-consuming to share accessible books across different
countries (read e-Access Bulletin’s previous coverage of the Marrakesh
Treaty at the following link: http://eab.li/6j ).

Work on implementing the Treaty has been taking place since its initial
adoption in 2013, and earlier this month another milestone was reached with
an agreement between the European Parliament, the European Commission and
the Council of the European Union.

The latest agreement on the text of the Treaty – currently still in draft
form – states that accessible format books for use by blind and visually
impaired persons can be shared across countries – as originally planned –
and that further accessible book versions can be produced without needing
to ask permission from the book’s copyright holder.

This initially seemed like a cause for celebration by the many
organisations that have been campaigning for increased accessible book
access. However, one aspect of the agreement has proved a cause for
concern. Part of the agreement is a compromise, whereby EU member state
countries can choose to ask for financial ‘compensation’ from organisations
and libraries that distribute accessible books, in order to protect the
interests of those that hold the copyright to the book.

One of many organisations unhappy at this aspect of the Treaty is the
European Blind Union (EBU). David Hammerstein, EU advocate for the World
Blind Union (the EBU is one of six regional bodies of the World Blind
Union), told e-Access Bulletin that although the EBU is pleased with the
main agreement, which represents “an important step toward ending the ‘book
famine’” faced by visually impaired people, the EBU “actively opposes” the
compensation element, labelling it a “tax on accessible books”.

Explaining the compensation aspect, Hammerstein said: “It increases costs
for blind persons’ organisations and creates legal uncertainty for
cross-border exchange, because book providers need to know the law in other
countries. It also means that there will be no unified, harmonised rule in
the European Union, creating confusion and complexity. It is false to call
[this aspect] ‘compensation schemes’, because there is no economic loss to
be compensated and governments have never shown any substantial damage done
to publishers by accessible formatted works.”

These ‘compensation schemes’ are optional, and countries do not have to use
them, but Hammerstein said that a number of EU member states have already
announced their decision to try and use them.

To apply the compensation element, the Treaty says that there must be proof
that distributing accessible format versions of a book causes more than
“minimal damage” to the book’s rightsholder. In a press release on the
decision, the EBU state that they will fight compensation schemes which do
not present this proof: “[If this happens] we shall take legal action
against member states for violation of this Directive and the UN Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.”

A joint statement by the International Federation of Library Associations
and the European Bureau of Library, Information and Documentation
Associations also opposes the compensation schemes, calling it a “major
mistake”. The statement claims that, “Such schemes will reduce the ability
of libraries and charities to serve print disabled people … It cynically
disregards broader social and human rights objectives and does specific
damage to the interests of print-disabled people and the institutions that
serve them.”

In order for these measures to be enforced, the European Parliament must
approve this latest Treaty agreement in a plenary session. EU member states
then have 12 months to “transpose the legislation into their laws,”
Hammerstein said. Additionally, “the Council of the EU and the European
Parliament must still ratify the Treaty,” Hammerstein said.

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: http://eab.li/6s .

+02: New accessible ATM app points users in the right direction.

A new app that helps blind and visually impaired users track down
accessible ATMs has been launched.

The free LINK ATM Locator lets users search for cash machines that have a
range of usability features, including: audio assistance; wheelchair
access; free-to-use ATMs; £5 note dispensing; mobile phone top-up
facilities; and PIN number management.

The app then tells users where to find the nearest ATM based on their
requirements and guides them to the machine through Google and Apple Maps,
via a walking, driving or public transport route.

ATM network operator LINK and sight loss charity Thomas Pocklington Trust
developed the app together after the Trust approached LINK in 2016 to
discuss the idea. LINK confirmed that it was already looking into such an
app and began working with the Trust.

Thomas Pocklington Trust then carried out user-testing with blind and
visually impaired users, to ensure the app’s accessibility with Apple and
Android screen-readers.

Mary Buffee, Head of Consumer Affairs at LINK, told e-Access Bulletin more
about how the app works with these screen-readers: “Certain adaptations
have been made to the app when VoiceOver or TalkBack are switched on. For
example, a list view of ATMs is created and read aloud, starting with the
ATM nearest to the user, as opposed to a map with icons that is displayed
for sighted users.”

As well as locating their nearest ATMs, users can also search for cash
machines in a different area and report machines that don’t work properly
or fail to provide stated accessibility features.

Speaking about the feedback function, Buffee said: “There are a range of
areas customers can give feedback on, from ATM location to the safety and
security of the machines … LINK will listen to feedback from customers and
consumer groups about the app, and will look to develop it in the future if
there is a specific consumer need.”

Users can also leave positive feedback and save specific ATMs to a
‘favourites’ list. The LINK Locator app then alerts users when they pass a
favourite ATM.

Marsha de Cordova, Engagement and Advocacy Director at Thomas Pocklington
Trust, told e-Access Bulletin that the Trust was thrilled to work with LINK
on the app. She said: “It is vital that technology is accessible. LINK
involved the Trust at every stage of development, ensuring that
accessibility remained a priority, and they have been open to all of our
suggestions and feedback. We hope that other organisations follow in LINK’s
footsteps to make sure apps are accessible to all.”

Download the app for Apple devices at the Apple Store: http://eab.li/6d .

Download the app for Android devices at the Google Play Store:
http://eab.li/6c .

Read more about Thomas Pocklington Trust at the charity’s website:
http://eab.li/6e .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: http://eab.li/6r .

+03: ‘Smart cities’ are not inclusive – but they can be, new research
claims.

‘Smart cities’ are not serving the needs of people with disabilities and
older people, and risk deepening an existing digital divide, according to
new, in-depth research.

Smart cities are loosely defined as cities that integrate digital
technologies into their infrastructure to transform and improve the lives
of citizens and landscapes.

In 2016, G3ict (the Global Initiative for Inclusive ICTs) and non-profit
initiative World Enabled (which works to protect the rights of people with
disabilities) launched a research project to assess ICT accessibility in
smart cities around the world. Over 250 experts and smart city program
managers were surveyed and interviewed, with around 60% claiming that smart
cities were failing people with disabilities. Only 18% of respondents knew
of a smart city that uses ICT accessibility standards

As a result of the findings, G3ict and World Enabled have just launched a
Smart Cities for All Toolkit, featuring four digital tools to help those
involved in city planning to make future technology projects more
inclusive.

James Thurston, Vice President for Global Strategy and Development at
G3ict, told e-Access Bulletin that the toolkit was developed specifically
to address the key barriers to digital inclusion within smart cities. He
said: “Smart cities are positioning themselves as more competitive, more
inclusive, and more ‘liveable.’ However, we want to make sure that they
don’t leave our one out of seven city residents that may live with a
disability.”

Dr. Victor Pineda, President and Founder of World Enabled, told e-Access
Bulletin about some of the biggest barriers that people with disabilities
and older people face in smart cities projects: “User interface is a big
problem, but so is the lack of data being generated on or by persons with
disabilities. Both are problems we know must be addressed.”

The Smart Cities for All toolkit contains the following documents: a guide
to implementing priority ICT accessibility standards; a guide to adopting
an ICT accessibility procurement policy; advice on communicating the case
for stronger commitment to digital inclusion in cities; and, a database of
solutions for digital inclusion in cities.

Dr. Pineda explained how these tools can be used to increase digital
inclusion within cities: “We created a communications tool to help city
leaders promote or upsell digital accessibility within the IT departments
and generate more buy-in for digital inclusion and accessibility.  This
tool helps make the case for digital inclusion from both a human rights and
a business perspective.”

Crucially, smart cities and the technologies used in them represent a huge
opportunity to benefit citizens with disabilities and older citizens.
“There is no reason why the newly built digital infrastructure cities are
deploying should be leaving people behind,” Dr. Pineda said.

A summary of the research on the G3ict site further explains how smart city
digital services can be made more accessible: “Content can be made
available in multiple formats and languages, services can be offered
remotely to home-bound or geographically isolated citizens, digital formats
can serve multiple disabilities, and interact with a broad range of
assistive technologies.”

The next steps for the project involve building a ‘digital inclusion
maturity model’. Thurston said: “With this new tool, cities will be able to
assess where they currently stand on ICT accessibility and digital
inclusion and then build a roadmap for improvement.”

Additionally, the tools are being translated into different languages to
allow increased use across the world. “Just recently we released the tools
in Portuguese because we see so much innovative work on smart cities in
Brazil and Portugal,” Dr. Pineda said.

Read more about the Smart Cities for All project and toolkit at the link
below: http://eab.li/6l .

Find out more about G3ict at the link below: http://eab.li/6m .

Find out more about World Enabled at the link below: http://eab.li/6n .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: http://eab.li/6q .

++News in Brief:

+04: Tokyo Standards: All websites of the Tokyo 2020 Paralympic and Olympic
Games “must meet W3C [the World Wide Web Consortium] Accessibility
Guidelines,” according to official accessibility standards released by the
Games’ Organising Committee. The guidance also states that web content
should be checked as standards are updated, and that audio versions of any
official Olympic publications should be specially created and released on
“W3C compatible websites”, or as podcasts or MP3 files, as well as offering
Braille and large-print versions.

Read more about website accessibility for the Tokyo 2020 Paralympic and
Olympic Games: http://eab.li/6h .

+05: Cultural Shift: Increasing the digital accessibility of cultural
institutions, creating accessible e-books and “disability as a driver of
creativity” are all topics to be discussed at the eleventh European
e-Accessibility Forum, held in Paris on June 19. The theme for the Forum is
“e-Accessible Culture” and the event will explore how technology can make
cultural and artistic services, venues and products more inclusive.
Speakers include, Sandrine Sophys-Véret from the French Ministry of Culture
and Communication, and Alex Bernier, Director of BrailleNet. Further
details and information on registration can be found at the link below.

Read more about the eleventh European e-Accessibility Forum at the event
website: http://eab.li/6i .

+06: Airborne Inclusion: An in-flight entertainment system designed for
passengers who are blind or visually impaired has been launched by Virgin
Australia Airlines on two models of aircraft from its fleet. The new
interface includes voice prompts, simplified screen layouts and larger
icons, as well as allowing visually impaired passengers to easily access
flight information, such as the time and distance remaining to their
destination.

Read more about the new in-flight system at Virgin Australia’s website:
http://eab.li/6f .

[Section One ends].

++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust.

E-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for people
with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas Pocklington Trust
by visiting their website:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].

++Section Two: The Inbox - Readers’ Forum.

Please email all questions, comments and responses to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

+07: iPlayer Access: Regular Bulletin correspondent Brian Gaff gets in
touch with a query about using audio description in the BBC’s iPlayer
catch-up television service:

“In the new-look BBC iPlayer, does anyone have any idea how a person
selects audio description before the content starts to play and drowns out
a screen-reader? If there was somebody at the BBC who could be emailed, it
would be very helpful.”

Please send any advice or solutions to: eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

[Section Two ends].

++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.

e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month on The
Early Edition programme. Hear more about the bulletin and upcoming content
appearing in each issue, as we discuss the latest accessible technology
news and readers’ questions with Allan Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts from the RNIB
Connect Radio site. Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via television,
smartphone or radio. Listening details at the following link:
http://eab.li/3e .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website: http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].

++Section Three: Analysis. - EU accessibility legislation.

+08: Keeping the public sector accessible.

By Carine Marzin.

The EU directive on making the websites and mobile apps of public sector
bodies more accessible was adopted at the end of 2016 and is the very first
piece of EU legislation on digital accessibility. It will benefit over 500
million European citizens, including an estimated 80 million Europeans
living with a disability, by making digital content from the public sector
across Europe more accessible.

Governments will have to check that public sector bodies consistently
adhere to the accessibility standards and there will be a new enforcement
procedure, making it easier for members of the public to complain about
inaccessible content and get the situation resolved.

(For background information on the directive, read e-Access Bulletin’s
coverage in previous issues at the following link: http://eab.li/6k .)

This is a ‘minimum harmonisation’ directive, setting out minimum
accessibility requirements for websites and mobile apps that all public
sector bodies in all 28 EU member states must meet. Governments are able
and encouraged to go above and beyond these minimum requirements.

- When will the directive be in force?

The directive has to be transposed into national law in all EU member
states by September 23, 2018. All websites created after that date will
have to be accessible by September 23, 2019. Existing websites will have to
comply by September 23, 2020. All mobile applications will have to be
accessible by June 23, 2021.

The directive applies to state, regional and local authorities, but also to
bodies ‘governed by public law’ such as hospitals or universities.
Importantly, governments can extend the accessibility requirements in the
directive to private companies offering facilities and services to the
public, such as transport, utilities, electronic communication services and
postal services.

- Accessibility requirements and exemptions.

The European Commission will publish the technical specifications that
public sector bodies will have to meet by December 23, 2018. In the
meantime, the public sector will need to comply with clauses from an
existing European standard on procuring accessible ICT.

The directive does not apply to websites and mobile applications of public
service broadcasters and their subsidiaries.

Some types of content are temporarily excluded from the scope of the
directive if they are not needed for administrative processes. Examples
include: office file formats (such as PDF documents) published before
September 23, 2018; pre-recorded time-based media (such as audio-only and
video-only) if published before September 23, 2020; and the content of
archived websites. However, public sector bodies will still have to make
this content accessible on request.

Content of extranets and intranets published before September 23, 2019 is
also excluded from the new accessibility directive, unless a substantial
revision of the systems takes place.

Permanent exclusions to the directive include live, time-based media, plus
online maps and mapping services (as long as essential information is
provided, such as a postal address or information about nearby public
transport). Other exclusions include some third-party content. For example,
user-generated content, such as a photo without alternative text or a video
without captions posted on a forum – these examples would both be exempt
from the directive’s accessibility requirements, but the forum itself would
have to be accessible.

The directive also includes a provision explaining that delivering
accessibility requirements should not impose a “disproportionate burden”
for public sector bodies. However, the right to invoke this principle is
limited. For example, lack of priority, time or knowledge will not be
accepted as legitimate reasons.

It is important to note that the requirements in this directive are in
addition to accessibility requirements in the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as well as requirements introduced
by new EU legislation on public procurement in 2016. The latter of these
makes accessibility a mandatory criterion for all public procurement
intended for use by the general public, or staff of any contracting
authority, and is a powerful lever to deliver more accessibility.

- Keeping updated and public feedback.

Governments will have to ensure that public sector bodies provide and
regularly update a detailed, comprehensive and clear accessibility
statement on their websites and mobile applications. Furthermore, a
feedback mechanism will enable anyone to notify a public sector
organisation if a website or mobile application is inaccessible, and to
request accessible content instead. Public sector bodies will be required
to give an “adequate response” to these notifications or requests “within a
reasonable period of time,” as well as providing information about the
enforcement procedure.

- Enforcement.

Governments have to ensure that there is an “adequate and effective
enforcement procedure” for the directive – this will be defined at national
level. Governments will also have to designate a national authority to
monitor and enforce the new rules. In many countries, such as the UK, going
to court was, until now, the only way to seek a solution to inaccessible
public sector digital content, and for most people, the cost of litigation
was a barrier. The new enforcement procedure will give everyone an
alternative, non-judicial avenue to seek a solution, by submitting
complaints to a national authority.

Additionally, governments will have to promote and facilitate training
programmes on website and mobile app accessibility for relevant
stakeholders. Governments will also monitor compliance with the
accessibility requirements in the directive. Experts are currently working
with the European Commission to develop a monitoring methodology.

- Carine Marzin is a Consultant and Member of the European Disability Forum
- ICT Expert Group. Follow Carine on Twitter: @CarineMarzin .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: http://eab.li/6o .

[Section Three ends]

++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com . Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link underneath
the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s ‘forward’
button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive: http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor
when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited: http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:

Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek
Accessibility Advisor: Dr. Nick Freear

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 190 ends.]
