++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 195, November 2017.

For HTML and text versions of all previous issues, please visit the
e-Access Bulletin Archive. Thanks to Dr. Nick Freear for maintaining the
Bulletin Archive.

e-Access Bulletin is produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington
Trust.
http://pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link
underneath the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s
‘forward’ button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up
page below: http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email questions, comments, article ideas and news leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard.
http://headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 195 contents.

Section One: News.

01: New online platform aims to be a game-changer for accessible ICT.
- Resources portal acts as a collaborative space to bring industries together.

02: Funkify plugin reveals impaired browsing to all users.
- Simulator distorts web pages to highlight access issues.

03: New site guides businesses towards accessible tourism.
- Tourist boards helping businesses to publish access information.

News in Brief: 04: Inclusive Accommodation – Airbnb accessibility
improvements; 05: Mobile Knowledge – Access features explained; 06:
Digital Developments – Government Digital Service announces changes.

Section Two: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.

07: App Happy – Charity launches free guide;
08: Device Doctor: Advice on iPhone vs. Android debate.

Section Three: Report.
– AI at TechShare Pro 2017.

08: Artificial intelligence and accessibility: the voice of things
to come.
How can artificial intelligence be used to improve accessibility and help
people with disabilities? This was one of the key themes discussed at the
TechShare Pro conference in London. Speakers from across industries
examined the benefits, and setbacks, of AI, exploring systems and apps
that currently use the technology and how this will evolve in the future.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: New online platform aims to be a game-changer for accessible ICT.

An accessibility resources platform that claims to be ‘the first of its
kind in the world” has been launched.

DeveloperSpace aims to be a comprehensive portal for information on
inclusive digital content and systems, for a wide-ranging audience.
Although primarily aimed at developers, designers and anyone building
digital systems or content, the site has been created to foster
collaboration between different industries and disciplines, in the hope
of creating and sharing what the site calls ‘accessible solutions’ to ICT
accessibility problems.

To identify and address these problems effectively, computer-users with a
range of impairments were involved at all stages of building
DeveloperSpace.

Key features of the site include an ‘Accessibility Masterlist’ (which
gives information on a range of ICT accessibility features, such as
alternative computer settings and audio enhancement), ‘Quicksheets’
(summaries of topics such as social media accessibility and PDF readers)
and tutorials on a range of topics, such as inclusive e-publishing and
accessible web games.

Other features include a question and answer forum and a ‘Challenges’
section, where people can volunteer to solve accessibility tasks,
sometimes for prize money or funding. One challenge is based around
improving a ‘photosensitive seizure tool’ (which detects flashing web
content that could cause seizures in some users) so that it can be
released as open source, carrying a reward of $10,000.

DeveloperSpace was created as the main outcome of the European
Commission-funded Prosperity4All project and is part of the Global Public
Inclusive Infrastructure (GPII), both of which aim to drive forward
inclusive technology development and access to these technologies.

Gregg Vanderheiden – Prosperity4All’s Technical Coordinator and Director
and Professor of the Trace R&D Center at the University of Maryland –
told e-Access Bulletin that as well as providing key resources, another
aim of DeveloperSpace is to collate knowledge and ideas from across the
board. He said: “A goal is to bring together input from consumers and all
members of a development team – specialists, testers, teachers,
researchers and more – to provide individual guides about particular
aspects of the site that may be helpful to them.”

Speaking about what makes the platform the ‘first of its kind in the
world,’ Vanderheiden said: “The DeveloperSpace differs from other sites
in that it looks at the problem comprehensively, providing tools for all
types of information and communication technologies – including anything
with a digital interface.”

DeveloperSpace has already been used to help build and improve a number
of accessibility projects, some of which are highlighted on the site.
These include printing services for visually impaired students and a
programme to create accessible video for refugees in the Netherlands.

Find out more at the DeveloperSpace website below:
https://ds.gpii.net/ .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://headstar.com/eablive/?p=1433 .

+02: Funkify plugin reveals impaired browsing to all users.

A new browser plugin that distorts web pages to simulate the online
experience for users with impairments is aiming to encourage developers
to create more accessible websites and apps.

The Funkify tool is available in Google Chrome and features a range of
filters, which intentionally make it difficult to read and navigate
online content. The intention is to recreate how users with visual, print
and motor impairments experience the internet.

Funkify was developed by a team of accessibility enthusiasts from
companies and startup projects in Sweden. A prototype was created for a
‘hackathon’ competition in 2016 and was awarded a joint first place in
the event.

The group then successfully applied for innovation funding to build the
plugin during 2017. A new beta version has just been released for
testing.

The team worked with people with a range of impairments, to develop the
Funkify simulations, which imitate effects of sight loss (including
blurry vision, tunnel vision and central vision loss), ‘trembling hands’,
dyslexia and colour vision deficiency.

For example, the ‘tunnel vision’ filter blanks out a large part of the
user’s screen, leaving only a small area to read text on the page, while
the ‘trembling hand’ filter causes the cursor to judder constantly.

To make the simulations as authentic as possible, the team “interviewed,
brainstormed and tested” with people with different impairments.

Speaking to e-Access Bulletin, one of Funkify’s co-founders, Lena
Furberg, said: “We strive to make the experience as memorable as
possible, so that people remember it and have accessibility in mind the
next time they create a colour palette, choose font sizes or decide on
the height of click targets.”

She added: “Of course, everyone experiences things differently, and we’re
not saying that people will understand exactly what life is like with –
for example – a tremor if you try the ‘trembling hand’ simulator.”

Reactions from users without impairments using Funkify have been
positive, but the goal remains to drive forward inclusive web design and
content by sharing the tool with developers. “It’s nice to see some
people get the point of ‘design for all’ and accessibility for the very
first time when they use Funkify,” Furberg said. “We hope to reach as
many web and app developers as possible and make them understand the
importance of making their products accessible, and prioritise this
higher than they do today.”

As a follow-up to the project, the team behind Funkify are also building
a separate tool that will simulate cognitive impairments, including ADHD
and autism, which will launch in December.

Download the plugin for free at the Funkify website:
http://www.funkify.org/ .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: Funkify:
http://headstar.com/eablive/?p=1431 .


+03: New site guides businesses towards accessible tourism.

Tourism businesses in England and Scotland, such as hotels, restaurants
and sightseeing attractions are being encouraged to produce
‘accessibility guides’ online to let visitors know about access
facilities.

VisitEngland and VisitScotland, the official tourist boards for both
countries, have launched a website that gives organisations a template
for creating a guide. The result is a single, standardised page
containing comprehensive access information for users.

This information is available in simple menus, telling users which areas
in a venue have level access for wheelchair use, where there are hearing
loops for visitors with hearing aids, and what facilities exist for
visually impaired visitors, such as alternative print format menus.

Also on the page are contact details for each venue, travel and arrival
information (such as accessible parking facilities and
wheelchair-friendly ramps), and the option to download the page as a Word
document.

Any business can use the site to produce a guide. Users just need to
register through the site and are then guided through the process
step-by-step. This includes looking at example guides, answering a
questionnaire on access facilities at the venue and uploading photos.

Once the guide has been created, the business is given a unique URL to
publish and share, allowing everyone to view the page. As the page is
created through a standardised template, visitors can easily familiarise
themselves with the format.

VisitEngland’s head of business support, Ross Calladine, told e-Access
Bulletin that the guides enable potential visitors to make informed
decisions about where to visit and stay, based on their individual needs.
Calladine said: “One in five of the UK population has accessibility
requirements, meaning that about 20% of potential customers would like to
have practical information on accessibility. Furthermore, with an ageing
population, those with accessibility requirements are likely to represent
an even larger section of the potential customer base. An accessibility
guide helps businesses to future-proof their venue.”

Find out how to create a guide at VisitEngland and VisitScotland’s
Accessibility Guides site:
https://www.accessibilityguides.org/ .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: Tourism guides.
http://headstar.com/eablive/?p=1429 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Inclusive Accommodation: Airbnb has taken a series of steps to make its services more accessible for users with disabilities. The online accommodation rental platform will incorporate listings from accessible accommodation platform Accomable (which has been acquired by Airbnb) and use new ‘accessibility needs’ checklists, (which allow hosts to provide more detailed access info about their property for travellers with disabilities), as well as working to make its website and mobile app easier to use for all.

Read more about the accessibility improvements at the Airbnb website:
https://press.atairbnb.com/making-travel-more-accessible/ .

+05: Mobile Knowledge: A free guide on mobile accessibility features for
iOS and Android devices has been released by accessibility consultancy
The Paciello Group. The ‘mobile testing’ guide explains how to use
built-in accessibility apps and settings (such as Android’s TalkBack and
VoiceOver on iOS, including control gestures and shortcuts), as well as
how to test mobile web content for accessibility. The document is aimed
at anyone working with mobile apps and those who simply want to know more
about accessibility features on their smartphone.

The Mobile Accessibility Guide is available in accessible PDF at
The Paciello Group’s website:
https://developer.paciellogroup.com/blog/2017/11/mobile-accessibility-testing-guide-for-android-and-ios-free/ .

+06: Digital Developments: The UK’s Government Digital Service (GDS)
Accessibility team have made a number of accessibility improvements
across its operations. One of the steps has been to publish and update a
series of guides, including an introduction to making services
accessible, information on testing websites for accessibility and
understanding the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. The
changes have been informed by various pieces of research (including the
2016 GOV.UK assistive technology survey) which looked at how government
teams approached accessibility and the challenges they faced.

Find out more at the GDS blog on GOV.UK:
https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2017/10/23/were-making-accessibility-clearer-and-easier/ .

[Section One ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust.

E-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for
people with sight loss. Find out more about the charity’s work by
visiting the Thomas Pocklington Trust website:
http://pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


++Section Two: ‘The Inbox’
- Readers’ Forum.

Please email all questions, comments and responses to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

+07: App Happy: In last month’s Inbox, Tony Moss got in touch from
Manchester to ask for advice on the accessibility pros and cons of
iPhones and Android phones, and the apps for each device. Tony, who is
registered blind but has some vision in his left eye, wanted to know
which phone would be more useful for him before making a purchase.

Several readers contacted the Bulletin to flag up resources for Tony,
including Sophie Grattidge from sight loss charity Henshaws:

“Henshaws has recently created a free e-book with the 24 best apps for
people with a visual impairment, which I hope Tony or others may find
useful. We’ve divided the apps by topic and it covers identification,
social networking, navigation, shopping, work, reading and entertainment.

“We also provide free one-to-one training and assessments for visually
impaired people in Manchester and Liverpool to guide them on what
technology to use and how to use it. If Tony needs any support, he can
get in touch by phoning 0161 872 1234 or emailing
carrie.sant@henshaws.org.uk.

“The e-book can be downloaded at the Henshaws website
(https://www.henshaws.org.uk/ebook-24-best-apps-people-visual-impairment/ ).
Users just need to put in their email address first.”

+08: Device Doctor: Another reader, Hannah Bailey, offers Tony more
advice on the iPhone vs Android issue, highlighting some other useful
resources:

“Re: Apple vs Android, I think budget needs to be considered.
Frustratingly, while accessibility settings have certainly improved,
there is little consistency across brands as to how they are laid out and
the terminology used in descriptions.

“I also suggest making sure any type of voiceover technology has a quick
shortcut option for toggling on and off, as it can be difficult to
navigate to it quickly in settings.

“The organisation I work for, Berneslai Homes [a social housing landlord
managing properties on behalf of Barnsley Council], has made overview
videos on Apple’s VoiceOver feature and apps for different sensory
impairments. The videos are available on the Berneslai Homes ‘Device
Doctor’ YouTube channel
(https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCvuoSEIj2wIxjGZsSTQti5w ). We can take
requests for app overview videos as well.

“RNIB’s excellent Online Today project
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/online-today ) can also help people navigate the
choices.”

Please send any other ideas and advice to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


[Section Two ends].


++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.

e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month on
The Early Edition programme. Hear more about the bulletin and upcoming
content appearing in each issue, as we discuss the latest accessible
technology news and readers’ questions with Allan Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts from the RNIB
Connect Radio site. Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via
television, smartphone or radio. Listening details can be found at the
following link: http://eab.li/3e . Find out more at the RNIB Connect
Radio website: http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].


++Section Three: Report.
– AI at TechShare Pro 2017.

+08: Artificial intelligence and accessibility: the voice of things to
come.

Artificial intelligence (AI) was high on the agenda at the recent
TechShare Pro 2017 conference in London. Hosted by AbilityNet and RNIB,
the event explored a wide range of topics and ideas around digital
accessibility and accessible technology, with a range of speakers
discussing key ideas and developments.

One of the most popular themes of the event was AI and its potential
benefits for accessibility. AI technologies have evolved at a tremendous
pace over recent years and are now being used in everything from stock
market trading to email management – but how can these technologies be
utilised to help people with disabilities and impairments?

As delegates at the event heard, numerous innovative systems and projects
using AI are being developed, which could have a huge impact in the near
future, but as some speakers pointed out, AI is also being used to
benefit people right now, in devices and apps that many people use every
day. Here’s a summary of how AI was covered throughout the event.

Paul Smyth, Head of ICT Accessibility at Barclays, talked about the
future of banking from an accessibility point of view and how AI is
helping to enable this. Processes are becoming simpler, Smyth said, which
helps users to complete tasks with fewer issues. As an example and to
show how mobile banking is evolving, he then demonstrated a
voice-operated payment system through an app.

“Rather than users having to learn increasingly complicated systems,
there’s been a paradigm shift, where those systems now learn about users,
which is very powerful,” Smyth said.

Smyth also talked about the increasing use of biometrics systems in
banking, such as fingerprint recognition on apps, alongside voice and
facial recognition to identify customers.

He said: “These things are simple and secure, we just need to get more
comfortable in using them and the technology needs to evolve too.”

Smyth also talked about how technology is increasing personalisation
within banking and how this can improve user experience: “The exciting
bit in terms of AI is how it can power predictive insights,” he said,
explaining that AI will increasingly be used to advise customers on how
they can manage their money more effectively.

Following on from Smyth’s presentation was a panel discussion on ‘What
does AI mean for the future of accessibility?’, hosted by Robin
Christopherson, Head of Digital Inclusion at AbilityNet. Ellie Southwood,
Chair of RNIB, spoke about how various devices and apps are helping make
life easier for people with visual impairments. She explained how her
Amazon Echo Dot ‘smart speaker’ (which responds to voice commands and
questions from users) makes it simpler to find information, before
talking about a new talking camera app, Seeing AI.

She said: “The app’s ability to recognise not just text, but also people
and scenarios, is incredibly exciting, because in order to make decisions
about the world, you have to interpret it – and if you can’t see, the
interpretation you have is usually somebody else’s.”

Hector Minto, Technical Evangelist for Accessibility at Microsoft, then
explained how he thinks AI will change accessibility. He said: “One of
the challenges we have is to make accessibility matter to a wider
audience and this is one of the roles that AI can fulfil. Rather than
expecting somebody to provide information in an accessible format,
hopefully AI will mean that all documentation becomes accessible in the
future.”

Minto also spoke about Seeing AI and how he believes the app, and other
similar technologies, can change interactions for people with
disabilities. He said: “Seeing AI can recognise text, it can recognise
people and emotion, and recognising something changes the social dynamic
around disability.”

Explaining how someone who is blind could use the app to quickly identify
who is around them, Minto said: “It empowers people to enter a room with
their disability and take control, and that is a leveller.”

Following the discussion, an audience member asked the panel about
potential difficulties in using AI-based voice technologies, particularly
for people with cognitive impairments, and how these systems could be
made more accessible.

Responding to the question, Ellie Southwood said that there are still
“gaps” in the technology, but that using voice-operated AI systems to
carry out complicated tasks “has to be the future.” She explained that
these systems need to be customer-led and built around specific needs of
users to ensure they work effectively.

Hector Minto agreed with this point, claiming that: “People with
disabilities are going to lead the knowledge base on voice interaction.”

Later on in the day, Gareth Ford Williams, Head of Accessibility for
Design and Engineering at the BBC, hosted a session on ‘The BBC
Accessibility Journey and the Impact of Artificial Intelligence.’
Williams discussed how new and emerging technologies are being used by
the BBC to make its operations more accessible for users.

He explained how AI can be used in ‘object-based broadcasting’ to learn
about users’ viewing habits and tailor how programmes are delivered to
them based on their requirements.

Speaking more generally about the potential of AI systems, Williams said:
“Disenfranchised audiences are really going to benefit. For older
audiences and others who struggle to use some assistive technologies,
having something more humanistic as a mode of interaction is going to
create a lot of opportunities for them.”

In the afternoon, Kiran Kaja, Technical Program Manager for Search
Accessibility at Google, gave some insights on current and future use of
AI. He pointed out that “AI is everywhere. It’s already being used quite
widely – for example, in speech recognition, which is based on ‘neural
networks’. This uses ‘machine learning’ to replicate how the human
nervous system works.”

He explained that improvements to text-to-speech and predictive text
systems are being made using AI, before discussing ‘computer vision’, in
reference to the kind of image recognition that apps like Seeing AI use.
Kaja said: “Being able to use computer vision to recognise objects and
find the relationship between the objects – those things have really big
potential for helping people with disabilities.”

Kaja also addressed a key issue that delegates had been discussing
throughout the day: ease-of-use of AI systems, particularly for users
with impairments. He said: “The great thing about all of this is that as
a user, you shouldn’t need to worry about what AI is and what it can do –
it should all just work for you. That’s the hallmark of great UX [user
experience] design.”

More information about TechShare Pro 2017, including videos and
presentation materials from the event, can be found at the AbilityNet
website:
https://abilitynet.org.uk/techsharepro .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live: TechShare Pro and AI:
http://headstar.com/eablive/?p=1427 .

[Section Three ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link
underneath the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s
‘forward’ button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform
the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin
may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:

http://headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:

Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek
Accessibility Advisor: Dr. Nick Freear

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 195 ends.]
