++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access to technology for all, regardless of ability.
- ISSUE 194, October 2017.

For HTML and text versions of all previous e-Access Bulletin issues,
please visit the Bulletin Archive at the following link:
http://eab.li/6a .
http://headstar.com/eab/archive.html

Thanks to Dr. Nick Freear for maintaining the Bulletin Archive.

e-Access Bulletin is produced with the support of Thomas Pocklington Trust:
http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link
underneath the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s
‘forward’ button. Please encourage others to subscribe at our sign-up
page below:
http://lists.headstar.com .

Please email questions, comments, article ideas and news leads to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

E-Access Bulletin conforms to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard. Visit the TEN Standard website:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 194 contents.

Section One: News.
01: Technology is key to making travel more accessible, new report finds.
- From virtual reality to AI to mobile apps, tech can be a travel enabler.

02: ‘Call for Evidence’ launched to help make voting more accessible.
- Government asks disabled voters about their experiences in elections.

03: Procurement is key for accessible ICT in the workplace, claims new guide.
- Online resource for employers gives detailed plan for accessible purchasing.


News in Brief: 04: Consumer Voices – Product reviews website planned;
05: Screen-reader Research – WebAIM survey; 06: Insightful Viewing – RNIB video.


Section Two: The Inbox – Readers’ Forum.
07: iPhone vs. Android – Which is the better phone for visually impaired users?


Section Three: In focus.
– Navigating daily life.
08: How to buy a hamburger without losing your self-esteem.

Visually impaired residents of a Toronto neighbourhood are benefitting
from some simple but potentially game-changing technology. Businesses in
the area are installing Bluetooth beacons, which link up with a mobile
phone app to help users navigate around premises. Mel Poluck investigates
how the project is improving residents’ daily lives and increasing
independence.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Technology is key to making travel more accessible, new report finds.

People with access needs still face numerous barriers when booking and
undertaking travel, but existing and emerging technologies are crucial to
making the process more accessible, research claims.

The new report found that while advancing technologies such as voice
recognition, artificial intelligence and virtual reality are being used
by some companies and hotels to make travel more inclusive, website
accessibility and use of mobile devices – for tasks such as managing
bookings – are still fundamental for travellers with access needs.

The study, ‘Voyage of discovery: Working towards inclusive and accessible
travel for all’, was commissioned by travel technology consulting firm
Amadeus and carried out by Ilunion, a consulting firm owned by ONCE, the
Spanish National Organisation of the Blind. It looks at the requirements
and first-hand experiences of travellers with access needs and explores
how ‘the travel experience and customer journey’ can be made more
accessible by examining three stages of the process: ‘The pre-travel
stage: what happens before the trip’, ‘In transit: what happens on the
journey’ and ‘In destination: what happens upon arrival’.

Results are based on responses from focus groups and interviews with
consumer travellers and industry experts, featuring contributions from
people with “visual, hearing, cognitive and physical disabilities,” and
travellers over 65-years-old with accessibility needs, all from the
United States, European Union and India.

Speaking about the findings of the report, Elizabeth Aston, Senior
Advisor for Industry Affairs at Amadeus IT Group, told e-Access Bulletin
that “Technology will be a pivotal factor in making travel more
accessible. We are already seeing companies use mobile applications, more
intuitive user interfaces, voice recognition, data analytics and customer
management systems to help address [access barriers] identified by
travellers … But technology is not the sole answer, it must also be seen
in the wider context of accessibility, as an enabler and facilitator of
change and action.”

As demonstrated in the report, the same technology that can aid more
accessible travel can also become an obstacle when it is not designed
inclusively. For example, difficulty in navigating inaccessible travel
websites was found to be one of the biggest barriers for users during the
booking stage.

The report also notes that when booking a trip online, “there is a lack
of standard procedures for communicating passengers’ specific needs.”
Despite this and other issues, the report found that online booking was
still by far the most popular method for booking trips.

A later section of the report examines how technology is empowering
travellers. The report notes that “Some hotel chains are using mobile
apps to allow guests access to their rooms and other facilities, and
others are using virtual reality to demonstrate accommodation and
services.”

Here, the study points towards the increasing use of Bluetooth-enabled
navigation beacons, wearable technologies and even driverless cars as
potential future aids for accessible travel.

Other significant findings from the report include the discovery that
“travellers would increase their travel budget by 34% if accessibility
barriers were eliminated,” representing a clear business incentive for
the industry alongside moral obligations.

The report ends by making recommendations on how the industry can work
towards making travel more accessible for all, including a call for the
development of “global standards for accessibility in travel and
tourism.”

Read the full report at the Amadeus website, available in accessible PDF:
http://eab.li/8n .
http://www.amadeus.com/web/amadeus/en_1A-corporate/Amadeus-Home/Resources-and-downloads/Research-reports/voyage-of-discovery/1319560217334-Page-AMAD_DetailPpal?assetid=1319713177380&assettype=AmadeusDocument_C&parent=1319609444141

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/8r .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1402


+02: ‘Call for Evidence’ launched to help make voting more accessible.

The UK Government is gathering public opinion to find out how accessible
the country’s electoral system is for persons with disabilities.

The Call for Evidence was launched online by the Cabinet Office to
collect information about direct experiences of voters with disabilities
in elections.

The document claims that responses will “help identify if current
mechanisms to support disabled people to participate in the democratic
process are sufficient,” as well as identifying good practice from the
Electoral Services Team in elections.

Questions in the Call for Evidence ask respondents detailed questions
about their experience in registering to vote and casting a vote,
including what can be done to make these processes easier for persons
with disabilities.

Other sections focus on support provided to persons with disabilities at
elections, and whether any support received has been sufficient. The
document also provides a summary of the support that must be offered by
law to persons with disabilities at elections.

Responses to the Call for Evidence will help inform a report highlighting
key findings and giving recommendations for making elections more
accessible. The report will be published by the government and the
Accessibility of Elections Group in spring 2018 after responses are
reviewed by the Cabinet Office Accessibility Working Group, whose members
include RNIB, the Royal Mencap Society, Scope, the NHS and the Electoral
Commission.

The Call for Evidence is available online in HTML or in accessible Word
document and PDF versions (produced with guidance from RNIB), and ‘easy
read’ Word and PDF versions, produced with guidance from Mencap.

The deadline for responses, which can be sent via email or post, is
November 14.

Find out more and respond to the Government’s Call for Evidence on access
to elections at the Cabinet Office consultation page:
http://eab.li/8d .
https://gov.uk/government/consultations/access-to-elections-call-for-evidence/call-for-evidence-access-to-elections#Support-Annex

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/8q .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1399


+03: Procurement is key for accessible ICT in the workplace, claims new guide.

A detailed online resource to help employers purchase effective
accessible technology through their procurement processes has been
released.

The guide, called ‘Buy IT!’, has been produced by the US-based
Partnership on Employment & Accessible Technology (PEAT).

The introduction to Buy IT! states that a successful accessible ICT
purchasing strategy means: “doing vendor research, specifying your
requirements, and validating the accessibility of your product choices
prior to accepting and implementing them. Most importantly, it means
approaching ICT procurement with an eye toward accessibility and
usability from the very beginning.”

A detailed step-by-step plan for employers and purchasing staff is then
set out, explaining how to work towards an accessible procurement
programme in three sections: planning, solicitation and ‘post-award’.

The ‘planning’ section explores how employers can gain executive support
for accessible procurement and what to look for when researching vendors.
‘Solicitation’ gives a thorough grounding in writing an
accessibility-focused procurement solicitation, including requesting
accessibility information from vendors and contractors, and ensuring that
the solicitation documents are fully accessible. As the guide points out,
this last step “is especially useful for attracting vendors that may
employ people with disabilities who may not otherwise be able to access
your solicitation.”

The final section, ‘post-award’, gives a detailed breakdown of steps to
take when employers are ready to make a contract award. The guide
emphasises the importance of ‘testing and validation’ here, to avoid
potentially difficult scenarios in the next stage of the process: “All
too often, customers take vendors at their word when they say a product
is accessible, and then accept it without testing the product and
validating the claim,” the guide says.

The key to avoiding this situation is ‘acceptance testing’, claims the
guide, which helps determine whether a procured product meets the
necessary criteria drawn up in the sales contract. The guide then goes on
to outline models to test for ICT accessibility.

Read the full Buy IT! resource for purchasing accessible technology at the PEAT website:
http://eab.li/8j .
http://www.peatworks.org/Buy-IT

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/8p .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1396


++News in Brief:

+04: Consumer Voices: A consumer reviews website focusing on products to
assist independent living will be launched in spring next year by
national research charity Rica, with reviews written by disabled
consumers. The new site, named Rate it!, is being funded by the
Disability Research on Independent Living and Learning (DRILL) programme,
and will be shaped by responses to a recent Rica survey, plus upcoming
focus groups and user-testing.

Read more about Rate it! at the DRILL website:
http://eab.li/8e .
http://www.drilluk.org.uk/rate-consumer-product-reviews-disabled-people/


+05: Screen-reader Research: A screen-reader user survey is being
conducted by non-profit accessibility organisation WebAIM, to help inform
web developers and content producers. All screen-reader users are invited
to complete the survey, which covers users’ preferred screen-readers,
mobile apps and accessibility of social media sites. The survey closes at
the end of November 1.

Find the screen-reader survey at the WebAIM site:
http://eab.li/8f .
https://webaim.org/projects/screenreadersurvey7/


+06: Insightful Viewing: A new video has been released by RNIB, giving an
overview of different types of sight loss and explaining that 93% of
people registered blind or partially sighted are able to see something.
The video features contributions from people with different conditions –
including glaucoma and macular degeneration – speaking about their
experiences, and is part of RNIB’s #HowISee campaign.

Find RNIB’s video on YouTube at the link below:
http://eab.li/8i .
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ovtjg2Ne1jo

[Section One ends].


++ Notice: Thomas Pocklington Trust.

E-Access Bulletin is brought to you with the kind support of Thomas
Pocklington Trust, a national charity delivering positive change for
people with sight loss. Find out more about the work of Thomas
Pocklington Trust by visiting their website:

http://www.pocklington-trust.org.uk .

[Notice ends].


++Section Two: ‘The Inbox’
- Readers’ Forum.

Please email all questions, comments and responses to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

+07: iPhone vs. Android: Tony Moss from Manchester, UK, has contacted
e-Access Bulletin to ask for advice on purchasing a smartphone. Tony
wants to know the benefits that both iPhone and Android phones offer for
blind and visually impaired users. As Tony points out, it’s a
much-discussed issue and many people are loyal to their preferred brand,
but what if you need some objective advice about both systems? Over to
Tony:

“I am looking for impartial information on the pros and cons, for a
visually impaired consumer, when deciding whether to purchase an iPhone
or Android smartphone, reflecting the most up-to-date accessibility
features for either a blind or partially sighted person.

“I am trying to compare systems and deciding which is best for me. I’m
registered blind but have some residual vision in my left eye, and in
certain conditions with high-magnification I can see the phone’s screen,
but I would need inverted colours. However, at other times – outdoors,
for example – I would be unable to see the screen and would need to rely
on speech output to operate the phone.

“It’s difficult to find a comprehensive comparison article or independent
information resource, and individuals’ views are often solely informed
from one perspective. Most blind people I know swear by their iPhone, but
Android are making great strides with their accessibility features, but
it’s harder to find a proper assessment of these.

“It would also be useful to know about the availability of apps for
visually impaired users on each system, and which apps are popular with
VI users.”

Do any readers have advice or resources for Tony? Please send over to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .


[Section Two ends].


++ Notice: RNIB Connect Radio and e-Access Bulletin.

e-Access Bulletin will be appearing on RNIB Connect Radio each month on
The Early Edition programme. Hear more about the bulletin and upcoming
content appearing in each issue, as we discuss the latest accessible
technology news and readers’ questions with Allan Russell.

Episodes will be available after broadcast as podcasts from the RNIB
Connect Radio site. Listen to RNIB Connect Radio online, or via
television, smartphone or radio. Listening details at the following link:

http://eab.li/3e .

Find out more at the RNIB Connect Radio website:
http://eab.li/1h .

[Notice ends].


++Section Three: In focus.
– Navigating daily life.

+08: How to buy a hamburger without losing your self-esteem.

By Mel Poluck.

When the CNIB (formerly the Canadian National Institute for the Blind)
opened its community hub last summer in Yonge St., Toronto, it set its
ambitions high.

“We moved in, sat down and thought ‘how can we make this neighbourhood
the most accessible in Canada?’” says CNIB’s Kat Clarke, Specialist Lead
(Toronto), Advocacy and Government Relations (Ontario).

“The closest intersection to us wasn’t accessible, so we advocated to the
[local council] to make it more accessible, which they’ve done,” says
Clarke.

Now, a CNIB pilot aims to take local accessibility a step further using
simple technology. ‘ShopTalk: BlindSquare Enabled’, allows blind and
visually impaired people to find their way around the interiors of shops,
cafés and other businesses in the neighbourhood via an app on their
phone.

Small Bluetooth devices (‘beacons’) are mounted on the wall of the
premises, near the door. When the user is in range, the app picks up on
the Bluetooth signal, then speaks directions to the user. These
directions use the clock-face method, such as: ‘Upon entrance, washrooms
are at nine o’clock’. The directions also orientate users with distances,
like ‘forward five metres to counter.’

To activate the GPS-enabled app, users simply shake their phone. Shaking
a second time triggers further information, such as shop opening times.

“Businesses don’t have control over what the messaging is,” says Clarke.
“We would never want it hijacked so business owners could include a
two-for-one offer, for example.”

CNIB can also tweak or add new information based on changing
circumstances – if the layout of a store changes or construction work is
taking place at the entrance, for example. The range of the Bluetooth
signal is normally set between five and ten metres, but can be adjusted
to avoid interference, such as when beacons are located in consecutive
shops.

The app itself is a free version of the BlindSquare app from MIPSoft,
which allows blind and visually impaired users to navigate outside. The
app can be downloaded from the iTunes store in a range of languages (read
more at the BlindSquare website:

http://eab.li/8k
http://www.blindsquare.com/ ).

So far, “under 50” beacons have been deployed in the Yonge and St. Clair
neighbourhood, says Clarke, but CNIB aims to install 200 by February
2018.

For now, the focus is on getting more organisations on board. CNIB staff,
volunteers and the visually impaired community are informing businesses
of the scheme via email and in person. ‘Hello neighbour,’ opens its
standard letter, ‘We want to help you make your business more accessible
and inclusive,’ it says.

Clarke says this part of the initiative has been challenging, not least
because of common misconceptions.

“Some people have declined to take part. It comes from misunderstanding
what accessibility means,” she says. “It’s the attitude when people have
an invisible disability: ‘I don’t have blind customers!’ How do you know?
Maybe you would if you had the beacons,” says Clarke.

She says that reluctance may also stem from fears over security, with
banks showing particular concern. But CNIB has won over many sceptical
organisations, explaining that they do not capture data on users and the
beacons emit low-frequency Bluetooth, meaning there is no cost to
businesses, as neither electricity nor wi-fi is being used.

There has been an “overwhelmingly positive” attitude from the majority of
local businesses, says Clarke. Once a business agrees to host a beacon,
the process is simple. “We go out and look at the space,” Clarke
explains. “Once we know where beacons will be placed – someone literally
puts it on the wall with tack – we can create messages based on that.”

“It opens up a whole new world,” says Ray Smith, who is blind and uses
the app. “Let’s say I want to get a hamburger. Once I open up the door of
the restaurant, I lose my independence and I lose my self-esteem.

“And then there’s the safety concern – there may be stairs facing me. The
app will tell me if there are stairs in front of me and if I turn to
three o’clock there’s a counter. So I can independently find the counter.
I’m not asking anyone else. It’s amazing.”

Smith has already used the app in a chemist, several restaurants and the
local Baptist church, the largest in the country.

“Some people don’t want to ask ‘where’s this?’ or ‘where’s that?’ I’ve
talked to people using it and they are getting about more. I think I’ve
got more independence, absolutely.”

Smith says he is particularly looking forward to banks using the beacons,
because locating a cash machine (ATM) as a blind customer is
traditionally difficult due to the wide variation in their positioning.

Such indoor navigation systems are gathering pace globally. The same
BlindSquare technology has been used in Wellington, New Zealand, where
200 shops are participating in the ‘No Dark Doors’ project.

Meanwhile, in the northern hemisphere, a notable example is Wayfindr,
which is being trialled on the London Underground. Originating from the
Royal London Society for Blind People’s (RLSB) Youth Forum, the idea
received £1 million funding through the Google Impact Challenge
Disabilities programme. Wayfindr has also developed the world’s first
standard for accessible audio navigation (Read e-Access Bulletin’s
previous coverage of Wayfindr:

http://eab.li/1t
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1185 ).

The CNIB’s initiative has enough money to run for a year, thanks to
funding of $26,000 from the Rick Hansen Foundation’s Access4All Program.
Once the target of 200 beacons has been reached, the priority will be to
secure sustainable funding beyond 2017, and then expand the scheme, based
on data and feedback.

The future looks promising. A property development company recently
requested beacons for all of its buildings, and a bank, the Transit
Commission (Toronto’s local government department for transport) and
library are also interested. Most recently, a theatre installed four
beacons, so that users of the app can independently find their way to the
box office to buy tickets, get to their seat and find the bar.

And with some 10,000 people with sight loss expected to visit the new
CNIB community hub in its first year, take-up of the system is likely to
be significant.

The project is improving the independence of blind and visually impaired
people living in or visiting the neighbourhood. But one gets the
impression that the real aim is a long-term change in attitude.

“We’re hoping we can use this as an interesting conversation starter and
have a much longer discussion with businesses – what about access to
customer services or your sandwich board in the street, for example?” Kat
Clarke says. “There’s a longer-term educational piece. Already we’ve had
a fantastic result. We’ve started conversations.”

Smith echoes the sentiment. “You’ve still got to have customer services
and etiquette, but it’s planting a seed.”

Read more about ShopTalk: BlindSquare Enabled at the CNIB website:
http://eab.li/8m
http://www.cnib.ca/en/ontario/ShopTalk/Pages/default.aspx

Mel Poluck is a freelance journalist and copywriter. Follow her on
Twitter at: @melpoluck (http://eab.li/8s
https://twitter.com/melpoluck?lang=en ) .

Comment on this story now at e-Access Bulletin Live:
http://eab.li/8o .
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1404

[Section Three ends]


++End Notes.

+How to receive E-Access Bulletin.

To subscribe or unsubscribe to this free monthly bulletin, visit:
http://lists.headstar.com .
Please encourage others to sign-up!

Please send requests, comments and ideas for news or features to:
eaccessbulletin@gmail.com .

To forward this free publication to others, use our forward link
underneath the end of the bulletin instead of your email application’s
‘forward’ button.

Previous issues of E-Access Bulletin can be viewed in text or HTML format
at the following online archive:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .

E-Access Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts, including this
copyright notice, are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform
the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin
may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-Access
Bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and the website address below
is also cited:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .

+Personnel:

Editor: Tristan Parker
Technical Director: Jake Jellinek
Accessibility Advisor: Dr. Nick Freear

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 194 ends.]
