
++E-ACCESS BULLETIN Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of
Ability - ISSUE 128, August 2010.

A Headstar Publication. http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin, so others can sign up to
receive a copy (details at the end).


++Issue 128 Contents.

01: Apple Devices ‘Revolutionary’ For Built-In Accessibility -
iPhone and iPad praised for integrated approach.

02: Voluntary Compliance To Web Access Standards ‘Inadequate’ - US
Justice Department consults on stronger regulation.

03: Japanese Cloud ‘To Improve E-Government Accessibility’ -
Collaborative system gives disabled citizens better public access

News in Brief: 04: Equality Shift? - lawyer detects slip in
government timetable; 05: Inclusion Masters - Middlesex University
claims European first; 06: DAISY Diversity - audiobook readers.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum. 07: Money Talks –
affordability plea; 08: Links Support – reader backs format
choice.

Section Three: E-Access ’10 Conference Report - Social Networks
Discussion Group. 09: Digital Lifeline: Delegates heard how
networks such as Facebook can prove a vital social lifeline for
people with disabilities who can otherwise be extremely isolated.
But access to such networks can be arduous due to inaccessible
design, reports Dan Jellinek.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Apple Devices ‘Revolutionary’ For Built-In Accessibility.

Apple’s iPhone and iPad devices are “revolutionary” and
“game-changing” in offering built-in accessibility functions for
people with disabilities, delegates heard at this year’s E-Access
’10 conference in London.

Kiran Kaja of the RNIB Digital Accessibility Team told a mobile
phone workshop that while accessibility applications are available
for other smartphones – such as the ‘Eyes Free Shell’ for Google’s
 Android phone – the iPhone 3G is a “game-changer” because its
accessibility features are built in across all its functions.

Using the standard touch-screen you can move your fingers along
and the phone reads what is underneath them; and if you swipe down
with two fingers it reads from that point to the end, Kaja said. A
double-tap with three fingers will magnify the screen.

“A lot of people say they can’t use a touch-screen, but when I
show them this it really changes their perspectives,” he said.
“People have started asking why they should pay extra money for
accessibility on mainstream devices. So slowly we are seeing
changing expectations. When Symbian [an operating system for
mobile phones] was released in 2000, it was two or three years
before assistive technology was developed for it, so phones could
be out of date before assistive technology appears. With the
iPhone, I could use it the same day as my sighted friends.”

Accessibility features that are built in by the manufacturer are
also more stable than added extras like screen-readers running on
top of an operating system, Kaja said.

Apple’s new ‘iPad’ table computer – which functions much like a
huge iPhone – was also singled out for praise by Robin Spinks,
Principal Manager, Digital Accessibility at RNIB.

The iPad’s size meant it was a “revolutionary” improvement for
partially-sighted users, who could use it at a normal distance
like a more visible smartphone, with applications and the keyboard
feature all viewed larger, Spinks said.

Used as an electronic book reader, the iPad can also magnify text,
and it featured the same built-in access functions as the iPhone
3G such as the double-tap with three fingers to magnify the
screen, he said. “One of the advantages of Apple’s much-criticised
“walled garden” approach is that is can build in accessibility to
all functions.”

Further accessibility features are likely to be added to
smartphones in future that make use of the built-in gyroscopes and
accelerometers found in most modern phones, said Kiran Kaja. “They
are mainly used by games developers now , but could also have uses
for people with disabilities,” he said. Early examples include the
free ‘Dasher’ app which allows the user to tilt and move the phone
with one hand to select items, a feature of use to many people
with impaired mobility:
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/dasher/id315473092?mt=8 Short link:
http://bit.ly/bQgqbm .

NOTE: E-Access ’10 was hosted by E-Access Bulletin publisher
Headstar with One Voice for Accessible ICT Coalition (
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess10 ). For more coverage see
feature, this issue.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=457


+02: Voluntary Compliance To Web Access Standards ‘Inadequate’.

Voluntary application of technical standards on accessibility of
web sites to people with disabilities has proved “inadequate”,
suggesting more formal regulation is needed, the US government has
said.

In a document issued as part of a public consultation process on
four new proposed regulations to extend the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) to improve technology access for disabled
people, the US Department of Justice said: “Voluntary standards
have generally proved to be sufficient where obvious business
incentives align with discretionary governing standards as, for
example, with respect to privacy and security standards designed
to increase consumer confidence in e-commerce. There has not,
however, been equal success in the area of accessibility.”

Overall, it says: “It is clear that the system of voluntary
compliance has proved inadequate in providing website
accessibility to individuals with disabilities” (
http://www.ada.gov/anprm2010/web%20anprm_2010.htm ).

As well as web accessibility – covering online goods and services
– the four ‘advance notices of proposed rulemaking’ (ANPRMs) cover
captioning and video description in cinemas; equipment and
furniture; and the widening of how emergency (911) telephone calls
can be made.

On captioning and video, comments are invited on the types of
technology that could be used in cinemas to make film screenings
more accessible, including closed captioning and audio description
equipment. The department proposes a ‘sliding compliance
schedule’, whereby the percentage of cinemas offering such
technologies would increase from 10 per cent in year one to 50 per
cent in year five.

The ‘equipment and furniture’ notice covers accessibility of ATMs
(cash machines) and point-of-sale devices, asking for public
comment on access technologies such as voice-operated and tactile
systems.

The ‘Accessibility of Next Generation 9-1-1’ notice examines the
possibility of internet-based text or video emergency calls being
put through to an operator directly, rather than the individual
having to go through a third-party telecommunications assistant
who relays the call, as is currently the case.

All notice summaries can be viewed at:
http://www.ada.gov/anprm2010.htm . And public comments are invited
by the end of the year at: http://www.regulations.gov/ .

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=460


+03: Japanese Cloud ‘To Improve E-Government Accessibility’.

A ‘web accessibility cloud centre’ to help Japanese government
departments improve online services to elderly and disabled people
is being built by a consortium led by IBM Japan:
http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/32265.wss Short
Link: http://bit.ly/bEpADT

Working with IT solutions firm the KOA Corporation and the Tottori
Prefecture Information-Center (TIC: a third sector Japanese
company that supports government IT projects), the cloud centre
will feature a collaborative system that allows citizens to browse
government websites; report any accessibility issues they
encounter; and suggest improvements. For example, users with
visual impairments will be able to easily record difficulties in
understanding text or images.

Each accessibility request will be stored in a bank for later
consultation by designers of government website pages, allowing
them to address issues raised.

The collaborative aspect of the web accessibility improvement
system is based on technology developed in 2008 by the Tokyo arm
of IBM Research as part of its Social Accessibility Project
examining issues faced by visually impaired internet users (see
http://sa.watson.ibm.com ).

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=464


++News in Brief:

+04: Equality Shift? The new UK government has backtracked on a
firm timetable for implementation of all parts of the Equality Act
2010, a leading lawyer has said. Audrey Williams, partner at law
firm Eversheds, said that while the coalition government has
confirmed the act will begin coming into force in October as
originally planned, guidance from the Government Equalities Office
(GEO) suggests that some elements of the law, such as the
extension of public sector equality duties and the introduction of
rules prohibiting age discrimination by service providers, have
been put on hold, with no set implementation date:
http://press.eversheds.com/Latest-views/Eversheds-comment-
Government-announcement-fails-to-extinguish-equality-law-
speculation-717.aspx Short link: http://bit.ly/duw6Yc

+05: Inclusion Masters: A Masters Degree course and Postgraduate
Diploma in Digital Inclusion are being offered by Middlesex
University, in what is claimed to be a European first. The courses
focus on the social and ethical issues of digital inclusion as
well as technical aspects of access of to ICT, with modules
including accessible web design; design for all regulation,
legislation and standardisation; and inclusive design and user
experience:
http://www.mdx.ac.uk/courses/postgraduate/computing_and_it/
digital_inclusion_msc.aspx Short link: http://bit.ly/bRUpjg

+06: DAISY Diversity: The world’s largest library of educational
audio textbooks for people with impaired vision, the US-based
Recording for the Blind & Dyslexic, is working with technology
companies to widen the range of reader devices on which its
content can be played. First steps include availability of the
library’s DAISY (Digital Accessible Information System) content to
its 270,000 members using the Intel Reader, a mobile device that
magnifies or reads out text. Future plans include availability on
Apple iPods and iPad tablet computers, E-Access Bulletin has
learned: http://www.prweb.com/releases/2010/07/prweb4328054.htm
Short Link: http://bit.ly/drRT9S

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to: inbox@headstar.com
.

+07: Money Talks: AnnaMarie Beresford, a trainer at the
Sunderland-based community interest company ‘Disability Arts
Empowerment’ ( http://www.dartecic.org.uk/ ) that trains people
who have long term disabilities and mental ill health, writes in
with a heartfelt comment about a major accessibility issue that is
not always properly recognised: affordability.

“I have found that as many as 8 out of 10 of our learners cannot
access the internet due to the expense of adaptive software (as
many free to install items just don't cut it),” Beresford says.”
Also the sheer lack of money and computers on the cheap are often
out of their reach even if they can access training.

“I am a deafblind physically disabled person who has mental health
issues, and it is only the fact that I have been lucky enough to
gain employment, and have the knowledge to use the ‘Access to
work’ scheme as well as being a specialist in access technology
that I can afford to have the luxury (to me a necessity) of being
able to access the web and do many functions other people without
impairments take for granted.

“I too have been isolated due to affordability issues with regard
to cost of equipment and technology - not to mention the price of
software! Until this changes many of us will stay isolated.”

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+08: Links Support: Fay Rohrlach, a reader from Australia, writes
in to lend her support for our recent changes to the presentation
of web links in the bulletin – offering a short link alternative
to longer links, alongside the original link.

“I would like to agree with you, as... you get all these letters
and numbers, which make it very confusing, and half the time when
you're trying to access something, it's hopeless.

“A shorter link would be far better, and yes, you can have the
longer address for the other link, and that way you are giving a
person the option to choose what they want. I'm glad someone is
doing something out there, to making things more simpler for
everyone.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription - Alternative Formats At
Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL,
Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and
sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide: -
One-stop shop for all formats - Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style - Fast
turnaround of one document or thousands - Multi-format discounts -
Accessible packaging

Contact us at: Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for
typetalk) Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: E-Access ’10 Conference Report - Social Networks
Discussion Group.

+09: Digital Lifeline by Dan Jellinek.

For people with motor disabilities, who may have problems leaving
the house, communicating or with social confidence, online social
networks can be a true liberator, delegates heard at this year’s
E-Access ’10 conference hosted by Headstar and E-Access Bulletin
with One Voice for Accessible ICT Coalition (
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess10 ).

A discussion group on the accessibility of social networks to
users with motor disabilities was hosted by Makayla Lewis of the
Centre for Human-Computer Interaction Design, City University
London, and herself a carer for her parents and a voluntary worker
for people with cerebral palsy.

People with disabilities suffer from high rates of depression,
said Lewis: many may only see one person a week, their carer. To
such people social networks are a good way to share experiences
and meet new people, even if their disability is severe, she said.

One young woman she had worked with had no siblings and stayed in
her room most of the time, said Lewis. “She just used to sit in
the corner.” For her, social networks had become indispensible.

“She says ‘I can’t socialise without it’, it’s is like food to her
– she’s on it from the moment she wakes up to the moment she goes
to bed. Social networking allows you to portray yourself how you
want”, Lewis said. Although the interaction is virtual, it can
also help to build real friendships and help boost confidence for
face to face communication as well, she said.

The average person with a disability has 250 friends on Facebook,
for example, compared with 130 for non-disabled people, Lewis
said. Unfortunately, however, many people encounter barriers in
using such networks, of which the biggest is accessibility. One
problem was that while many people with motor disabilities would
benefit from technologies such as voice recognition and
text-to-speech screen-readers, public funding for these expensive
tools is geared towards people with impaired vision.

“People with motor disabilities are given big keys and so on.
Screen-readers would be very useful but they are not funded for
that. You never find a screen-reader on a list of aids for them -
they are not considered necessary for people with motor
impairments. Funding is geared towards blindness.”

The problem can be even more basic, Lewis said: many occupational
therapists, GPs and users themselves  don’t have the technical
awareness or understanding to know what tools are available to
help people access computers. “They don’t know the stuff is out
there. The way you find out about access technologies these days
is on the internet, but if you don’t have access to the
internet...”

Some people with severe disabilities are helped in accessing
computers by their carers, but this means their interactions
cannot be independent and can be hampered by a lack of trust,
Lewis said. “If you get tired, and a carer types for you, how is
that independent communication? How is that private communication?
A carer might leave after a few weeks, and a new one comes. So
people can’t always trust them straight away, and just ask them to
send messages online like ‘I’m fine, see you soon’ – they don’t
open up and say what they want to say.”

There are also problems with the design of the main social
networks, Lewis said, not least that the main sites often change
their layout, which can present huge challenges to someone
accessing a computer using a tool like a switch, who has learned
over painstaking hours to navigate one layout only to find it has
all been changed around. “With Facebook, they are always changing
the site. Using a switch, you learn one format but then all of a
sudden they rearrange the layout and task structure.”

One answer might be for sites like Facebook to have a fixed layout
of their core features, such as your friends list and your
profile, which would remain stable across redesigns, she said.
Another might be to offer a simpler, pared-down version of the
site which only presented the core features. However Facebook had
removed just such a simpler version, ‘Facebook Lite’, for
commercial reasons, despite it being used by many people with
severe cerebral palsy, Lewis said.

Where changes are made, more understandable and relevant help
could also be offered to users in working out what the differences
were, she said.”Often changes are made to a site and people just
have to work it out. They could be uploading photos showing how to
use the new site step by step, like Twitter does online, with
arrows.”

People with disabilities often prefer help information that is not
text-based, such as videos or avatars, Lewis said. But they want
to see images that are relevant to their own lives: “Many people
with disabilities want help from an avatar who is also disabled”.

Apart from layout, many problems are caused by the small size of
online features which can be not only hard to see but extremely
hard to use for people with motor impairments, she said. Thus for
example Facebook features such as the ‘like’ button to express
your approval for something is too small for use by people with
impaired motor control.

Because of the way Facebook is formatted – text size is hard-coded
in - it s pages are also hard to magnify, Lewis said: users can
zoom in using their own magnification tools, but the result is
pixellated.

Nevertheless, many people persevere, she said: one user she knows
highglights all the text from her Facebook news feed every hour;
pastes it over into Word, where she can increase the text size
smoothly;  writes her replies or posts in Word; pastes them back
across to Facebook; and then spends 10 minutes trying to click on
the ‘update’ button, because it is so small.

The fact someone is prepared to go to all this trouble “shows you
how important it is for some people”, said Lewis.

When asked about accessibility, Facebook tends to say that only a
small number of people with disabilities are using the site, but
one of the main reasons for this is the inaccessibility of the
‘Captcha’ system of keying in distorted words that is used for
registration to the site, Lewis said. Also, while there are tools
specifically aimed at helping people with disabilities access
Facebook and other networks, there is low awareness of them, she
said.

Of course, Facebook is not the only network people can use, but
the others are not much better, Lewis said. “MySpace is terrible.
Bebo is better, but it is aimed at young people.”

Some other communities are set up specifically by and for people
with certain disabilities, the workshop heard, such as Living With
Ataxia (LWA - http://www.livingwithataxia.org), set up using the
‘Ning’ platform which allows anyone to set up a social network.

Alan Thomas, UK Community Manager of LWA,told delegates that such
focused networks helped people with particularly problems overcome
feelings of exclusion, by allowing them to share experiences.

On the other hand, people with disabilities also need to be able
to access the same mainstream networks as everyone else, Lewis
said. “Often networks are divided. Maybe they should link up more
and integrate more.

“It is disgusting that some people have to go to such lengths to
do something that is so fundamental for all human beings – to
communicate with each other.”

NOTE: On 21 September Makayla Lewis is hosting the ‘Web
Accessibility London Unconference 2010’. At time of writing this
was oversubscribed but a waiting list had been established:
http://a11yldn.eventbrite.com/

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=468

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Fortune Cookie - Web Sites That Really Work.

Fortune Cookie’s dedicated web accessibility team makes sure that
everyone finds the web sites we design easy to use. As well as
being accessible, Fortune Cookie sites are beautiful and deliver
stunning return-on-investment. They’re award-winning too. In 2007,
our work was nominated for major web design awards 11 times.

Legal & General, Kuoni, Diabetes UK, FT Business – just some of
the big name brands on Fortune Cookie’s client list.

Every business can benefit from making its web site more
accessible. If you’d like to know what accessibility can do for
your business, talk to Fortune Cookie.

Visit our web site at: http://www.fortunecookie.co.uk

Julie Howell is our Director of Accessibility. Email Julie at:
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk .

[Special notice ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum - Six Years of Accessibility
Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility discussion on the web for nearly six years.
Celebrating our sixth birthday next month, you’ll find discussion
of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility, want
to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to
browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2010 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com . The Bulletin
may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged
to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the
editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the
bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as
'taken from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter',
and our web site address: http://www.headstar.com/eab is also
cited.

+Personnel: Editor: Dan Jellinek. Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 128 ends.]


