++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 127, July 2010.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 127 Contents.

01: New Government Forum To Drive Accessibility
- Minister outlines work plan for coming year.

02: Australian 'e-Playground' For Children of All Abilities
- Memory and music games among free online resources.

03: Council Offers Real-Time Sign Language Video
- Sutton breaks new ground with on-demand service.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Cost Barriers - research lead; 08: Short Links - web link formatting.

Section Three: Focus - Web Access Guidelines.
09: Real World Approaches to Accessibility: The international Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) are useful in context but should be treated as just that - guidelines - and disregarded where they are ineffective, argues Brian Kelly.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.


+01: New Government Forum To Drive Accessibility.

The UK government's new 'eAccessibility Forum' will address three key areas: improving the regulatory framework; supporting businesses; and developing an 'e-accessibility action plan, Ed Vaizey, Minister for Culture, Communications and Creative Industries, told delegates at the recent E-Access
'10 event in London (
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess10/ ). The event was hosted by E-Access Bulletin publisher Headstar with the OneVoice Coalition for Accessible ICT.

The eAccessibility Forum was announced in the Digital Britain Act and is led by officials at the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS). On its first area of work, regulation, Vaizey said a consultation document would be published in September on the UK's implementation of the Regulatory Framework for Electronic Communications in the European Union, amended in November of last year, which covers electronic accessibility. The UK is required to transpose the framework by the end of 2011, he said. 

The forum's eventual 'e-accessibility action plan' will cover both consumer technologies and website accessibility, Vaizey said. "[This] doesn't necessarily mean by imposing regulations on bodies. It can be through partnership and persuasiveness as well and working together," he said.

The minister was speaking the day after UK digital champion Martha Lane Fox launched her Manifesto for a Networked
Nation: http://raceonline2012.org/manifesto ) which included the recommendation (in paragraph 9.2) that "Government should close down publicly funded websites that consistently fail to meet its own web accessibility guidelines."

NOTE: Further in-depth coverage of E-Access '10 will be featured in our August issue.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=456 .


+02: Australian 'e-Playground' For Children of All Abilities.

Memory-improvement games and an activity allowing children to create their own music are two of the games in a new free online play environment for children with special needs and disabilities.

The All Abilities ePlayground (
http://www.allabilitiesplayground.net.au/ ) was created by the Australian arm of Sonokids ( http://www.sonokids.org/ ), an international non-profit organisation developing technology for disabled people. It was commissioned by Gold Coast City Council in Queensland, Australia, with the state's Department of Communities (Disability Services).

Access features include a 'function for children with limited motor skills who can blow into a microphone to control games; and a 'single switch' control for children who are only able to use a single button on a computer.

The platform is based on the objectives behind 17 outdoor 'All Abilities' playgrounds built by councils across Queensland, as part of a government project. 

Phia Damsma, creative director of Sonokids Australia, told E- Access Bulletin the ePlayground was designed to be as inclusive as possible. "In addition to more traditional devices like keyboards, mice and joysticks, the ePlayground is tailored for use with touch screens and low-tech assistive technologies", Damsma said.

The ePlayground received positive feedback after being tested by special schools and special education units throughout Queensland, and it is hoped funding will be found for further development including personalising the platform to offer relevant local educational information, said Damsma.

"The current ePlayground introduces children to iconic Australian animals such as kangaroos, pelicans and crocs. We invite requests for Sonokids to localise and customise the ePlayground's design concept to suit other countries, languages and cultures", she said.

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=455 .

+03: Council Offers Real-Time Sign Language Video.

Deaf users of Sutton Council's website in the UK will be able to contact customer services through a live, online sign language interpreter, in what the system's owners believe to be the first service of its kind.

Sutton Council's website (
http://www.sutton.gov.uk/ )
features a 'SignVideo' link which connects deaf users to a specialist video call centre staffed by British Sign Language interpreters. The interpreters then contact the relevant council department and act as translators between the deaf website user and the hearing council staff member. This means that deaf website users can instantly discuss their queries with the council from any location with internet access and a webcam, without first having to book an appointment to ensure an interpreter is present. 

The system was created by the social enterprise Significan't ( http://www.bsl.org.uk/ ). Brigitte Francois, director of interpreting services at Significan't, told E-Access Bulletin that as well as giving deaf residents equal access to customers services within the council, the system also makes financial sense for the council.

"People are reluctant to book interpreters for a small conversation of 10-15 minutes, because most face-to-face interpreters charge for a minimum of three hours," Francois said. "Significan't's director, Jeff McWhinney, decided that video interpreting would bring a solution to this. Face-to-face interpreting is very necessary - we don't want to get rid of it - but in some circumstances it makes sense and is more cost efficient to be able to make a short call on the videophone."

The system has already received positive feedback from residents in Sutton, a borough in which there are around 250 deaf people. Sutton is the only London borough to have been awarded accreditation for accessibility by the Shaw Trust, a charity which assists disabled people to find and prepare for employment.

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=453 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Dyslexia Licence: Copyrighted texts can now be made
available by relevant organisations to people with dyslexia requiring them in accessible formats such as audio books and large print, after the UK's Copyright Licensing Agency (CLA) upgraded its Print Disability Licence. The CLA widened its definition of 'print disability' to include dyslexia after a request from the Accessibility Action Group, a forum of publishing organisations, and the Right to Read Alliance, a group of 19 charities lead by the RNIB:
http://www.cla.co.uk/about/news/article/?article_id=80
Short link:
http://bit.ly/aOeY5E

+05: Talking Android: The first barcode reader and email
reader for blind and visually impaired users of Google's Android operating system for mobile phones and devices have been developed in the US. The readers were created by Apps4Android, a subsidiary of IDEAL Group focused on developing applications for disabled users. The IDEAL Item Identifier allows smartphone users to scan barcodes and identify products, while the IDEAL K9 E-Mail reader is compatible with Google's open source screen-reader Talkback and other Android screen-reading products. IDEAL is now developing an open source Android web browser for the blind and an open source video magnification application:
http://apps4android.org/e-mail-and-barcode-scanner-
release.htm
Short link:
http://bit.ly/aw8TQV

+06: Good Cities: Nominations for the European Award for
Accessible Cities, which recognises good practice in access for disabled people, have been invited by the European Commission. Access in information and communication technology (ICT) is one of four categories recognised by the award, to be presented in December at the European Day of People with Disabilities conference in Brussels:
http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=879&langId=en
Short link:
http://bit.ly/aQ1Uc9

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: Cost Barriers: Last issue, Noel Hatch of Kent Council
asked readers if they knew of any research into how disabled people use digital technologies.

In response, management consultant Sue Thomas, formerly of EDS, writes: "I ran a study in 2007 for the UK Disability and Carers Service to see if the service could meet the targets they had been set to improve their current rate of use of online services from 1% to 8%.

"The study showed that around 45% of those suffering a disability and 65% of their carers had the propensity to use online services. The barrier was not their ability to use the technology but the cost of entry both in high speed broadband and technology."

Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Short Links: Also in our June issue, Clive Lever wrote in
to suggest a change to the way we publish web addresses in the bulletin. He suggested that where links were so long they run over a line, they should be accompanied by a shorter 'alias' 
link so people could choose which one to click.

Jude DaShiell, a computer programmer in the US civil service and regular E-Access Bulletin correspondent, wrote in to say: 
"It's never necessary for an organisation to use external services to provide short urls and doing so only involves setting up a blog on which to place content, then using short unique links to articles on that blog in email messages. As an example, today is July 4, 2010. I can write that using a date code in four letters; tjgd. The first two letters are the year t being the 20th letter in the alphabet and j being the 10th, that encodes 2010. 
The g is the 7th month in the year and d is the 4th day. 
Probably the easiest way to handle the last five days in a 31 day month would be to use uppercase letters running from A to E."

[EDITOR'S NOTE: Thanks for everyone's input, and we have made a decision - Jude's idea is a good one, but it does not really work for links to external stories as we cannot post those onto our blog, and also if we have many stories on the same date. As a compromise and to hopefully offer something for everyone, where links are long we will now offer a short link after every one, on a separate line. People can choose which one to use, and ignore the other. Please continue to provide your feedback on the results - further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk) Email transcription@adept-uk.org 

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Focus
- Web Access Guidelines.

+09: Real World Approaches to Accessibility
by Brian Kelly.

The theme of the Seventh International Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility (W4A 2010 - http://www.w4a.info/ ), held in North Carolina in April, was 'Developing regions: 
common goals, common problems?'

This provided an ideal opportunity to highlight the limitations of approach taken by the international World Wide Web Consortium's Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) to web accessibility, which is enshrined in legislation in many developed countries, and to argue that developing countries are in a position to avoid repeating mistakes made in the Western world.

One key issue is the importance of understanding the context of the use of web resources. The approaches taken to accessibility in a teaching and learning or cultural appreciation context may be very different from those taken to access to informational resources, for example. The resource costs associated with the provision of accessible web resources also need to be considered, and policies which endorse a view that all resources must be universally accessible to everyone, no matter what the cost implications may be, is naive and, in any case, is in conflict with legal requirements to take "reasonable measures".

The question of the costs of providing accessible services is becoming even more important in the UK in light of the new government's budget in which we can expect to see significant cutbacks in funding for the public sector. The economic concerns which we are currently facing will also be shared by those in developing countries.

Two examples from disability studies illustrate the value of applying critical theories to support more holistic approaches to web accessibility: 'Aversive disablism', and 'Hierarchies of impairment'. Aversive disablism is illustrated using a comparison with race theory: aversive racists are not anti- black, but pro-white. There is a need to understand how approaches to accessibility might be based on pro-non-disabled assumptions. Such considerations should be understood from the context of 'Hierarchies of impairment'.

The City University academic Mark Deal argued the need to be "focusing attention on impairment groups that face the most discrimination in society (i.e. those ranked lowest in the hierarchy of impairments), rather than viewing disabled people as a homogenous group". In the context of web accessibility, the focus of attention is often the needs of the visually- impaired, with the needs of users with learning difficulties having been seemingly marginalised in the development of accessibility guidelines. We conclude that "Critical research into accessibility for such groups is therefore recommended before standards can be invested".

In light of such concerns, should we simply shrug our shoulders and abandon any commitment to addressing the challenges of enhancing access to web resources? On the contrary, rather than ignoring WAI's Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) altogether, we should treat them as just that - guidelines, which are useful in many instances but can be disregarded if they are ineffective.

And rather than looking for an answer in a set of guidelines, which, in the case of WCAG 2.0 are relatively new, we should be looking for patterns of emerging best practices.

One example is the use of networked technologies in 'amplified events', in which Twitter 'back channels', access to speaker slides on SlideShare and video or audio streaming can enhance access to people not physically present at an event. 
We should regard this as providing many accessibility (and
environmental) benefits - indeed it might be argued that a failure to use such affordable technologies to provide event amplification could be regarded as discriminatory.

So rather than regarding WCAG conformance as a mandatory requirement, WCAG should be regarded as guidelines, which may be ignored if their use conflicts with other requirements, so long as steps are taken to address the potential exclusion that may result. It should be noted that UK legislation that requires use of 'reasonable measures' to ensure that users with disabilities are not discriminated against unfairly, provides a legislative context for this approach. A policy based on 'seeking to make use of WCAG' will provide the flexibility needed. This would not be possible with a policy which states that all resources must conform to WCAG.

'Reasonable measures' should also include identification of costs of conforming with accessibility guidelines. There should be consideration of the trade-off between financial savings and usability issues. 

If it is too costly or difficult to conform with accessibility guidelines, the provision of alternatives that are equivalent may be an appropriate solution. It should also be noted that the alternative need not be web-based: for e-learning resources, equivalent real world learning alternatives may be used. 

A requirement that all resources conform to WCAG is a 'just- in-case' solution. This may be an appropriate resource for widely accessed informational resources, but may be inappropriate if resources are expected to be little used. There may be advantages in delaying provision of accessibility solutions to allow development of technologies which can enable more cost-effective solutions to be devised. 

The need to ensure that disabled people are included in the design and development of web solutions must also be emphasised. And finally, there needs to be a focus on 'accessibility', rather than 'web accessibility': the benefits of web or IT solutions to real world accessibility difficulties needs to be considered. As described above, amplified events can address difficulties in travel and access, even though the technologies used may not conform with accessibility guidelines.

NOTE: Brian Kelly is UK Web Focus at UKOLN, a digital information management research centre at the University of Bath. This article outlines the ideas presented in an award- winning paper for W4A 2010 by Kelly with Sarah Lewthwaite and David Sloan: 'Developing countries; developing
experiences: approaches to accessibility for the real world' ( http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/web-focus/papers/w4a-2010/ ) Short link:
http://bit.ly/d9l9gi .

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=449

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for accessibility discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our sixth birthday next month, you'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the discussions.

So whether you're looking to learn more about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2009 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. 
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 127 ends.]
