++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 126, June 2010.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 126 Contents.

01: Association To Set UK Digital Format Standards
 - guidelines for accessible e-books due next year.

02: Public-Private 'Unwillingness to Co-operate' Over Smart
Homes
- Plan needed to help elderly and disabled at home, say
experts.

03: Danes Are Latest To Miss EU Web Access Target
- Research reveals poor record for government sites.

News in Brief: 04: Football Crazy - Online World Cup guide;
05: Canvassing Opinion - BBC joins online TV standards
project; 06: Big Problems - what US screen-reader users hate
about the net.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Research Call - basic information sought on use of
technology by people with disabilities; 08: Cut Links - we ask
for readers' web address formatting preferences; 09: Facebook
Solutions - social networking site access suggestions.

Section Three: Focus - Electronic Books.
10: The Right to Borrow: The UK's Digital Economy Act 2010
sought to widen and simplify the borrowing rules for electronic
and audio books from public libraries. But how well will the
new system serve readers with disabilities, who rely on new
formats to access information? Guy Whitehouse reports.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Association To Set UK Digital Format Standards.

The new UK Association for Accessible Formats ( UKAAF:
http://www.ukaaf.org/ )
is to set national standards next year for accessibility of digital
formats such as electronic books and synthesised speech, E-
Access Bulletin has learned.

The association, a charity formed last year, refined its work
programme for the next two years at its annual general meeting
in London earlier this month.

This included setting suggested minimum acceptable standards
for large print, Braille and audio formats by the end of 2010,
followed in 2011 by work on standards for synthesised speech,
electronic books and other digital formats.

All standards will be aimed at content and service providers;
transcribers; and end users, Alan Matthews, the association's
public relations officer, told E-Access Bulletin following the
meeting. "The goal is to set out an achievable minimum UK
standard that everyone can work towards, so the odd producer
out there who is not quite hitting the mark would have
something to aim at, service providers would have minimum
requirement for end users, and end users would have minimum
standard they could expect and service providers could not say
they can't do it, because of technical issues," Matthews said.

"For example, if I work for a utility, and I know I should
provide accessible formats, and I want to write them into a
tender but I don't know what standards to use, I could come to
UKAAF. Then I would know what I am asking for is
reasonable, achievable and what the end-user is expecting."

Ultimately, the association would like its standards to be
included in government regulations relating to accessibility, he
said. "If we can be talking to government within five years, it
would give our work a stamp of authority."

The association will also be looking at how current law in this
area, including the new Equalities Act 2010 and the Disability
Discrimination Act 1995 with its provision for 'reasonable
adjustments' to services, affect the way organisations need to
take account of format accessibility.

The meeting had been due to pass an emergency motion on
whether to endorse Unified English Braille (UEB) as the
"preferred" Braille format for UK use, in the face of US moves
to endorse the alternative Unified Braille Code. However the
meeting decided to delay a decision pending further
deliberations.

Three appointments were made to the board of UKAAF:
Michael Lewington, Director of Calibre Audio Library; Richard
West, former chair of BCAB and Sheila Armstrong, text
transcription co-ordinator at Torch Trust. The association's
president is former RNIB chairman Lord Low of Dalston.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=446


+02: Public-Private 'Unwillingness to Co-operate' Over Smart
Homes.

A coherent national plan is needed to develop integrated
systems and services for 'smart homes' to meet the needs of
disabled and elderly people, overcoming "entrenched
behaviours, convention, ego and unwillingness to co-operate"
across the public and private sectors, a London seminar heard
this month.

Delegates at the 'smart living' seminar heard that although
many pilot schemes were already testing components of next
generation home systems, there was little co-ordination
between the sectors involved including architecture,
engineering, building, health and care, energy,
communications, transport and bodies representing disabled
and older people.

"Without such a plan, the situation in five years time is likely
to be as fragmentary as it is today," said Professor Patrick Roe
of the European CARDIAC project (Coordination Action in
R&D in Accessible and Assistive ICT: http://www.cardiac-eu.org ),
which aims to create a 'road-map' to co-ordinate
research in this field.

Martyn Gilbert of 'UK3.0', a private-sector-led project to
create "next generation" homes, said the barriers to progress
lay not with technology but with organisational cultures.

"All of the substantive technology necessary to help older and
disabled people live as they wish in their own homes is here,
and has been here for several years. The obstacles are
entrenched behaviours in the public and private sectors. They
are obstacles of convention, ego and unwillingness to co-
operate in good will with other stakeholders.

"The nation can no longer afford the luxury of such
behaviours... it makes societal, business and national sense to
collaborate to bring about the widest installation of these
technologies in people's homes."

UK 3.0 is attempting to co-ordinate private and public sector
services to smart homes including intelligent energy and water
management and health promotion, with a target of
contributing £100 billion a year to the UK economy by 2019.

'Smart Living - the way forward for disabled and older people'
was hosted by the Department for Business, Innovation and
Skills (BIS) in association with the accessible ICT charity
PhoneAbility ( http://www.phoneability.org.uk ).

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=444


+03: Danes Are Latest To Miss EU Web Access Target.

Some 52% of Danish government websites are not fully
accessible to citizens with disabilities, new research has
revealed, in the latest blow for hopes of Europe-wide
accessibility improvements.

Conducted on behalf of the Danish Ministry of Science,
Technology and Innovation, a survey by Sensus - a Danish
consulting company specialising in accessibility, IT and
disability - assessed 226 government websites against
international Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG
2.0)

The results of the survey are another setback to the goal set at a
ministerial conference of EU member states in 2006 of all EU
government websites becoming fully accessible by the end of
2010. It is now expected that not one state will hit this target.

The Danish ministry now plans to launch an e-learning tool in
2011 featuring guidance on creating more accessible websites
and documents.

In the UK, guidance from the Central Office of Information on
'delivering inclusive websites'
(http://www.coi.gov.uk/guidance.php?page=131 )
in 2008 stating that all government websites should have
conformed to international 'AA' standards by 2011. However,
the public sector Society of IT Management's annual 'Better
Connected' review of every UK council website, published
earlier this year, found only 32 of 479 sites achieved even
basic accessibility levels (see E-Access Bulletin, March 2010
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=400 ).

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=441


++News in Brief:

+04: Football Crazy: An email guide to the ongoing FIFA
World Cup in South Africa, featuring match schedules,
statistics, and information on teams, players and stadiums, has
been produced for blind and visually impaired football fans by
the Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB). The guide
is also available in large and giant print booklet form, Braille,
and DAISY audio format, all costing £2.99 and available from
RNIB's website:
http://bit.ly/aOimfj

+05: Canvassing Opinion: Confirmation that the BBC is to
participate in 'Project Canvas', an initiative between major
broadcasters and telecommunications companies develop a
standard for internet-linked on-demand services through TV
sets, has been welcomed by the Royal National Institute of
Blind People (RNIB). The standard is seen as important for
ensuring usability and accessibility of such services. However,
the institute has warned that many blind and partially sighted
people will not be able to use Canvas on its launch without a
text-to-speech (TTS) function to navigate the menus, and is
pushing for a TTS requirement in the project's upcoming
technical specification:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/our_work/canvas/index.shtml

+06: Big Problems: Use of CAPTCHA tests - images that
present text to verify human computer users - and inaccessible
Adobe 'Flash' online multimedia content were rated as the
most problematic items by disabled computer users, in a recent
survey by US web accessibility company WebAIM. The survey
also gathered information and user opinions on different types
of screen-readers, and disabled computer users' experience of
social media tools:
http://www.webaim.org/projects/screenreadersurvey2/

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Research Call: A short and sweet request for information
from reader Noel Hatch, head of innovation projects and
research at Kent County Council in the UK.

Noel asks: "I was wondering if there was any research on how
and what disabled people use digital technologies?"

Ideas and links please to inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Cut Links: Another reader and regular correspondent from
the same organisation - Clive Lever, diversity advisor with
Kent Council - has written in to suggest a change to the way
we publish web addresses in the bulletin. Clive's suggestion
was triggered by problems he experienced accessing a long
web link in our last issue that split over a line.

"I did get to the article with an interesting bit of "text knitting"
in my 'open' slot on Internet Explorer. [But] please may I
suggest that we consider alternatives to long URLs [uniform
resource locators, or web links] in newsletters, possibly even as
part of newsletter accessibility standards?"

Clive continues: "I'm a great fan of services like Tinyurl (
http://www.tinyurl.com - a service that creates short links that
expand into longer ones), as you may not always know that
you haven't pasted in the complete link if you're playing about
with them in emails.

"If one [format] suits some people and the other suits the rest,
would it be too much to suggest being greedy and having both?
My preference would be for the original URL to be used alone,
except where it looks likely that it could run over two lines,
when it would be accompanied by a short URL so people
could chose which one to click.

"I'm a great believer in giving people choices, rather than
having a one-size-fits-all approach."

[EDITOR'S NOTE: We think this is an excellent suggestion,
because we have heard both sides now: first, that short link like
Tinyurl or Bit.ly are themselves not very accessible; and
second, that longer links are not accessible. To offer both
would therefore seem logical - but what precise format and
text layout should we use to do this? Please send in your
suggestions.]

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: Facebook Solutions:

Last issue, our Italian version translator Margherita Giordano
asked for advice on overcoming problems with accessing the
social networking site Facebook, and in particular its chat
features, using JAWS screen-reader software.

Jerry Weichbrodt of Michigan writes in to say: "With respect to
Facebook Chat, I agree that it can be awkward using a screen
reader. I, too, use JAWS and it's awkward to keep popping in
and out of Forms Mode to enter text and then look for
responses.

"One suggestion I have heard of, though I have not tried it
myself, is to use AIM version 7.2 to access Facebook Chat.
There is an explanation of this and a demonstration in Freedom
Scientific's 'FSCast' episode number 40 for March of this year.
See
http://www.freedomscientific.com/FSCast/episodes/fscast040-
march2010.asp .

Other than that, using the actual Facebook chat page, I believe
JAWS seems to see two edit boxes that it appears you could
type into, but only one of them actually works for the
purpose. [so] it may be useful to arrange to chat with
someone specifically for experimental purposes and then see
which edit box actually works for entering text."

Responding to the same appeal, Tim Carrington, a reader from
Kent, UK (where else?) had a different suggestion: "The
student should give up on JAWS and consider using WebbIE,
the free web browser for blind people with little or no sight
available from
http://www.webbie.org.uk  ."

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Focus
Electronic Books.

+10: The Right to Borrow
by Guy Whitehouse.

One of the last pieces of legislation passed earlier this year by
the UK's outgoing Labour government was the Digital
Economy Act 2010, which, among other things, extended the
Public Lending Right to audiobooks and ebooks in libraries.

This transfers out of copyright both physical hardcopy
audiobooks in libraries, and audio/ebooks downloaded to an
mp3 player or ebook reader on library premises; authors
receive a payment from the government for each loan based on
a rather complicated formula. The US does not currently have
a similar scheme, following a failed attempt to introduce one in
the 1980s.

The UK legislative change represents an attempt to simplify the
model of lending non-print material in libraries which had
hitherto occurred under a licensing regime which had never
really functioned properly. This had made librarians reluctant
to build up large stocks of such material, although interestingly
customers seem to welcome audiobooks: the global electronic
book distribution platform OverDrive has been extending its
business in the US, and in 2008 there were 11 million loans of
audiobooks from UK public libraries. Statistics for the year
2009 will soon be available. There are also some avant garde
librarians who regard ebooks as key to making libraries
relevant to younger members.

Since libraries have always been the key source of income for
audiobooks on traditional media such as cassette or CD, at least
in the UK, the change in the law has been broadly welcomed
by advocacy groups for people with impaired vision. However,
there are those who are critical, for example objecting to the
fact that audio- and ebooks accessed remotely via download
are not covered by the Public Lending Right (government
lawyers said this was impossible because such activity was
covered by the authors' right of communication to the public).
Many, not least the UK Registrar of Public Lending Right, feel
this is a significant gap because they do not think most people
download ebooks or e-audiobooks on library premises.
Nevertheless, it is a step forward.

Such issues are only going to gain in importance. In 2009 for
the first time the sales of ebooks were significantly higher than
those of audiobooks in the US. Many of the most passionate
advocates of audiobooks are moving to positions in companies
associated with the download market, and Audible.com
expanded its catalogue of unabridged audiobooks from 20,519
in October 2009 to 26,113 titles in May 2010.

Where does this leave issues relating to the accessibility of e-
books to people with disabilities?

The recent disputes over the Kindle's text-to-speech and over
the read-out-loud function of Adobe ebooks in public libraries
only makes sense in the context of an audiobooks industry
fearing that in some sense the future is slipping away from it,
whether those fears are justified or not.

If downloads are the future, particularly of unabridged
audiobooks narrated by a human voice, then securing access to
the internet and to computers in general for the visually
impaired becomes of ever-greater significance. It would be a
real tragedy if, just at the moment books become available in
non-print formats in large numbers, a lack of access to
technology in general and/or to the internet or mainstream
ebook readers prevented us from reaping maximum benefit.

In this regard, ensuring internet accessibility, whether through
enforcement of guidelines or through user testing, is critical
and making media players that visually impaired people
already use capable of playing ebooks and protected audio
downloads is as important as capturing access to a mainstream
e-books reader.

Guy Whitehouse is a PhD research student at Loughborough
University, UK.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=439

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Fortune Cookie
- Web Sites That Really Work.

Fortune Cookie's dedicated web accessibility team makes sure
that everyone finds the web sites we design easy to use. As
well as being accessible, Fortune Cookie sites are beautiful and
deliver stunning return-on-investment. They're award-winning
too. In 2007, our work was nominated for major web design
awards 11 times.

Legal & General, Kuoni, Diabetes UK, FT Business - just some
of the big name brands on Fortune Cookie's client list.

Every business can benefit from making its web site more
accessible. If you'd like to know what accessibility can do for
your business, talk to Fortune Cookie.

Visit our web site at:
http://www.fortunecookie.co.uk

Julie Howell is our Director of Accessibility. Email Julie at:
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk .

[Special notice ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility
discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our
sixth birthday next month, you'll find discussion of
accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you're looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2009 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 126 ends.]
