E-Access Bulletin, April 2014: Application of EU accessibility standard hits roadblock; Accessible e-book debates in UK and US.
Sent:	 29 April 2014 19:06

++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 167, April 2014.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the 
end).


++Issue 167 Contents.

01: Application of EU accessibility standard hits roadblock
- Law mandating use unlikely to be drafted until the autumn.

02: Supply chain collaboration key to accessible e-books
- Device makers must work with content producers, publishers told

03: E-book access debate continues in US following legal waiver
- US communications body offers manufacturers one-year exemption.

News in Brief: 04: EGAAD Returns - Global accessibility awareness day in 
May; 05: Government Research - what are most popular access tools? 06: Other 
Space - pioneering restaurant in Italy.

Section Two: News Analysis - European Policy and Standards.
07: The slow arm of the law: just as it seems progress is being made in 
drawing up European accessibility legislation, further delays appear. Dan 
Jellinek talks exclusively to the chairman of a European technical standard 
body at the heart of the struggle.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Application of EU accessibility standard hits roadblock

Application of a new European standard on ICT accessibility is being 
hampered by delays with an EU directive mandating its use by governments, 
the standard's developer has told E-Access Bulletin.

The 'European Standard on accessibility requirements suitable for public 
procurement of ICT products and services in Europe' (EN 301 549) was 
published in February by ETSI (the European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute).

Currently, however, the standard's use is not mandated by EU law, a fact 
which is likely to delay its take-up for some time, Matthias Schneider of 
ETSI tells E-Access Bulletin in an exclusive interview published this month 
(see Section Two, this issue).

"The EU has not yet ruled that the standard has to be used for procurement 
at European level, and unless a state regulates that the standard has to be 
applied by public procurers, I wouldn't expect many organisations will 
switch over to using it", Schneider said.

In 2011, the European Commission did announce it was developing a European 
Accessibility Act covering the accessibility requirements of all goods and 
services bought and sold in the EU, which would be likely to use the new 
standard. However despite several false dawns, it has since been delayed 
again and is unlikely to be drafted before the autumn, he said.

In a further complication, Schneider said the standard itself might have to 
be altered later this year to remain consistent with the revision of Section 
508 of the US Rehabilitation Act, a US law requiring ICT purchased by public 
bodies to be accessible. EU standards makers and technology companies are 
keen for the two systems to be aligned to boost international trade, but 
Section 508 has been undergoing its own review process which is lasting 
longer than policymakers originally expected.

NOTE: For the full story and a chance to comment on it online, see 'The slow 
arm of the law', Section Two, this issue.


+02: Supply chain collaboration key to accessible e-books

People in all parts of the publishing chain - from device manufacturers to 
those developing content platforms - must work together to improve e-book 
accessibility, delegates at the London Book Fair heard this month.

"No one player in the chain between author and reader can solve the problem 
of accessibility on their own . only through collaboration can we achieve 
our goal of delivering the content in ways and on platforms that suit the 
needs of particular readers", Publishers Licensing Society (PLS) chairman 
Mark Bide told the fair's seminar on accessible e-publishing.

The seminar is organised by the book industry standards body EDItEUR with 
the Royal National Institute of Blind People and The Publishers Association.

Speaking after the seminar, Bide told E-Access Bulletin the debate over 
e-book accessibility has shifted recently towards the need to ensure 
mainstream formats are flexible. "We are now increasingly focused on the 
importance of making mainstream e-books as accessible as possible, although 
we do not forget that there continues to be a need to facilitate access to 
specialist formats where no appropriate e-book is accessible", he said.

"As with any other reader, we simply need to deliver the reading experience 
that [readers] require - whether it be large print, text-to-speech, 
different text or background colours", Bide said.

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1013 .


+03: E-book access debate continues in US following legal waiver

Meanwhile, the debate over whether all e-book readers should be made 
accessible - including the addition of sound capabilities - is set to 
continue in the US, after the country's Federal Communications Commission 
granted reader manufacturers a temporary waiver to one accessibility 
regulation.

The FCC has granted a one-year waiver exempting single-purpose e-book 
readers from a requirement in the US 21st Century Video and Communications 
and Video Accessibility Act that equipment used for advanced communication 
services (ACS) be accessible to people with disabilities ( 
http://www.fcc.gov/document/coalition-e-reader-manufacturers-petition-waiver-acs-rules ) 
.

The move came in response to a petition filed last year by a coalition of 
e-reader manufacturers -Amazon, Kobo and Sony - who said that because 
e-readers are used almost exclusively for reading, they do not provide ACS 
(see http://bit.ly/16gW53i ). The firms also argued that to make such 
readers fully accessible would increase their cost and weight and decrease 
battery life, essentially turning them into different devices more similar 
to tablet computers.

In granting the waiver, the FCC said: "Although capable of accessing ACS 
(such as email), we conclude that this narrow class of e-readers is designed 
primarily for reading text-based digital works, not for ACS."

However, the commission limited the waiver to one year, despite the 
coalition's request for an indefinite waiver, saying: "given the swift pace 
at which technologies are evolving and the expanding role of ACS in 
electronic devices, the waiver will expire on January 28, 2015."

It also limited the waiver to "a distinct, narrow class of e-readers" with 
limited features, namely those with no LCD screen; no camera; and no 
built-in email, instant messaging or similar ACS applications. Most e-book 
manufacturers already also make more sophisticated, tablet PC-style readers 
which do comply with accessibility rules, and the new waiver in effect 
separates these categories of products from each other for legal purposes - 
for one year, at least.

Nate Hoffelder, editor of the e-books blog "Digital reader" ( 
http://www.the-digital-reader.com ), told E-Access Bulletin he expected the 
waiver to be extended again next year, since its removal would be likely to 
result in the simpler class of e-book readers being withdrawn from the 
market.

"By the time the new regulation was written in 2011, Amazon, Kobo... and 
other device makers all had one or more e-readers on the market which did 
not have sound, and thus could not comply with the regulation", Hoffelder 
said. "That put the device makers in the position of filing for a waiver or 
simply pulling the e-readers from the market."

However the American Library Association, which has campaigned against any 
waiver, said in a statement it was "pleased that e-reader manufacturers must 
file for a waiver next year and re-argue their case, or make their e-reader 
ACS features accessible to people with print and other disabilities."

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1015 .


++News in Brief:

04: EGAAD Returns: Thursday 15 May is the second annual Global Accessibility 
Awareness Day. The day, launched last year by US-based web developer Joe 
Devon, allows organisations and individuals working in the field worldwide 
to pool their efforts to boost accessibility awareness. To find out about 
events near you and join the campaign, see:
http://www.globalaccessibilityawarenessday.org .


05: Government Research: The UK Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) is 
trying to profile the types of assistive technology tools in use by citizens 
accessing the department's digital services, and would like to hear from 
E-Access Bulletin readers who have been involved in or know of similar work. 
In particular, managers are interested in finding out what assistive 
software tools are the most commonly-used, and if possible an estimate of 
the numbers of people using them in the UK. Anyone who can help with this 
research should please contact Clare Shepherd on:
clare.shepherd1@dwp.gsi.gov.uk


06: Other Space:
A restaurant accessible to deafblind people, raising awareness of disability 
issues for everyone and showing that blind and deafblind people can live a 
normal life, has opened in Bologna, Italy. Features include a tactile map at 
the entrance, and regular placing of cutlery, glasses and napkins. L'Altro 
Spazio (The Other Space) is run by the local cultural organisation Farm, 
which had previously opened the first bar in Italy run by deaf people called 
Untitled (Senza Nome), where people who ordered by sign language received a 
discount. For more information on L'Altro Spazio in Italian, see:
http://laltrospazio.com/
https://www.facebook.com/laltrospazio.viapolese .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Captioning.

Bee Communications has joined the Ai-Media group and is now able to offer 
classroom, lecture, meeting or event captioning on the game-changing Ai-Live 
platform. Real-time captions are streamed to a web-enabled device, and a 
transcript can also be provided after each session. The system is optimised 
for tablet use, with significant improvements to dictionary and transcript 
functionality, enhanced security, and an accessible caption viewer including 
dyslexic fonts and optimised colour palettes.

Captioning helps people learn and interact by providing equality of access 
to live content. For more information, please contact:
beth.abbott@ai-live.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Two: News Analysis
- European Policy and Standards.

+07: The slow arm of the law
by Dan Jellinek.

For many years, the disability community in Europe has been pushing the EU 
to write accessibility into its trade rules for ICT goods and services, not 
least when it comes to ICT purchased by governments themselves.

Similar rules have long been in place in the US, perhaps surprisingly for 
those who like to caricature America as a champion of free trade at any 
social cost. Now it seems, some progress is being made in Europe. But is it 
fast enough?

The 'European Standard on accessibility requirements suitable for public 
procurement of ICT products and services in Europe' (EN 301 549) was 
published in February by ETSI (the European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute - http://www.etsi.org ) in association with international 
groupings of national standards bodies CEN and CENELEC (www.cencenelec.eu). 
It had previously been known as Mandate 376, through a drawn-out development 
period of some seven years (see EAB, July 2012 - 
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=753).

The standard aims to ensure ICT products and services - including websites, 
software and digital devices from computers to smartphones and ticketing 
machines - are made more accessible to people of all abilities, either 
directly or through compatibility with assistive technologies such as 
text-to-speech. It is accompanied by three technical reports (TR 101 550, TR 
101 551 and TR 101 552), adding more detail.

Currently, however, its use is not mandated either by EU law or national law 
in any individual country, a fact which is likely to delay its take-up in 
most parts of Europe for some time, Matthias Schneider, chairman of the ETSI 
technical committee on human factors, told E-Access Bulletin.

"The EU has not yet ruled that the standard has to be used for procurement 
at European level, and unless a state regulates that the standard has to be 
applied by public procurers, I wouldn't expect many organisations will 
switch over to using it", Schneider said.

In 2011, the European Commission did announce it was developing a European 
Accessibility Act covering the accessibility requirements of all goods and 
services bought and sold in the EU, which would be likely to use the new 
standard. However despite several false dawns - including a promise last 
year that the act would finally be drafted in the first quarter of 2014 - it 
has since been delayed again.

"So far it has still not been drafted, and there is no clear insight why the 
commission has delayed for so long", Schneider said. "My personal opinion is 
that it will not appear prior to the instalment of the next European 
Commission in July or August, so I don't see anything happening before 
October."

As and when an accessibility act is passed it will cover both public and 
private sector procurement, and it will then be possible for member states 
to apply the new accessibility standard across all sectors, after a late 
change to it at the urging of the European Commission, Schneider said.

"The original purpose of the standard was very clearly public procurement, 
but during its development the commission realised it could be used for many 
more purposes", he said. "The problem was, to change its purpose halfway 
through development would have meant asking new groups of interested parties 
to comment, which was no longer possible. So in the end, we came up with 
something which didn't go all the way to what the commission wanted but 
still could also be used in other tasks such as in the private sector, 
provided someone mandates it."

The compromise reached can be seen in a small but key change in the standard's 
title, from the previous 'Accessibility requirements for public procurement' 
to the final 'Accessibility requirements suitable for public procurement', 
with the new wording leaving its use open in other fields, Schneider said.

In a bizarre quirk of the European standards system - that could cause 
unnecessary expense to the unwary - the new European Standard EN 301 549 is 
available free of charge from the ETSI website but costs a significant fee 
to buy from some national standards bodies. The latter group includes the 
British Standards Institution (BSI), which is charging members £134 and 
non-members £264 to buy the same standard (its website does not specify how 
much it charges for membership, which depends on how many standards an 
organisation uses).

It is usual for all national European standards bodies to publish their own 
copies of European standards, numbered within their own systems - the new 
standard is published by BSI as BS EN 301549:2014. However because different 
standards bodies have different business models, some charge for their 
products, while others do not. ETSI, funded by more than 700 members 
worldwide including technology companies, does not charge for its standards.

The situation is made even stranger by the fact that the British and other 
national 'versions' of a standard such as this one do not differ in any way 
from the pan-European version, Schneider said.

"It might have a different cover page, but the content is identical because 
they cannot change it. It is one of the puzzles that the European standards 
situation creates every once in a while."

The new standard does not create its own technical specifications from 
scratch in most areas, since this groundwork has already been carried out 
for existing hardware and software standards in Europe, the US and 
elsewhere, he said.

For example there are already standards specifying the range over which 
speech volume should be adjustable; and for web accessibility the new 
standard refers to level 'AA' of WCAG 2.0, the web content accessibility 
guidelines produced by the international World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).

Likewise for software that runs on desktop computers or other devices and 
for documents, the requirements are harmonised with work by the W3C's 
WCAG2ICT Task Force (http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag2ict). This means that 
the requirements for the web, documents and software all follow the same 
principles.

The work on this standard is seen as crucial for global trade and so ETSI 
and its partners have worked hard to ensure the accessibility requirements 
contained in the new standard are consistent with the revision of Section 
508 of the US Rehabilitation Act, a US law requiring ICT purchased by public 
bodies to be accessible, Schneider said.

However, this work has been complicated by the fact that Section 508 has 
been undergoing its own review process which is lasting longer than 
policymakers originally expected, he said.

"We have tried to synchronise with the newest version of Section 508, but 
unfortunately the newest version is not finalised, so we don't know what its 
contents will be yet. It could be that in half a year from now, when the US 
comes out with the newest version of Section 508, we might have to change 
ours again so it is compatible. We hope that this will not be the case.

"Harmonising our approach with US was extremely difficult and very 
time-consuming, but we want it to be harmonised because international 
companies such as Nokia, Motorola or Microsoft have no wish to develop 
products designed for accessibility requirements in Europe which are 
different to the US."

Progress in some areas is happening a bit faster, however. While Europe 
continues to wait for a general accessibility directive, one area where the 
new standard may be put to use more quickly could be public sector websites. 
There is a proposal to use it as part of accessibility guidelines for a new 
public sector website accessibility directive already passing through the EU 
law-making system
(see E-Access Bulletin, February 2014 - 
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=986).

It would also be possible for European nations to pick up on the new 
standard individually and embed it in their own policies, Schneider says. 
"Member states can act individually, so I would expect that some - probably 
Nordic countries and Germany first - will mandate it in their state 
procurement rules."

As well as creating major potential social benefits, European policymakers 
also hope the standard, and European Directives or state laws mandating its 
use, will help boost the market for technology companies and companies 
working in the accessible and assistive technology sectors.

As Elena Santiago Cid, director general of CEN and CENELEC, said in a 
statement: "We believe that including accessibility requirements in European 
standards will deliver both societal and economic benefits, by helping to 
expand the market for accessible products and services."

While the workings of European law move slowly, the new standard is the 
latest piece in a jigsaw puzzle which does seem to be finally coming 
together.

Despite the long delay in its development, and the new further wait for a 
law mandating it to be widely used, the standard's publication - following 
on from the directive on public sector websites - marks the beginning of a 
breakthrough.

In the US, Section 508 law is credited with driving the biggest technology 
companies including Apple and Microsoft to pay far more attention to the 
accessibility of their mainstream products. Step by step, Europe seems to be 
catching up.

Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1017

[Section Two ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination for 
accessibility discussion. The "site critiques" section has helped hundreds 
of people improve their websites, with members offering friendly, no 
nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to 
guru. So whether you're looking to learn more about accessibility, want to 
help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to browse the 
archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++Sponsored notice: Audio book mysteries to relax and enjoy

More and more people are using audio books to relax, and to develop and 
stimulate their imaginations. My name is Donna J. Jodhan and since 2010 I 
have been using my audio mysteries to help thousands from around the world 
to do just that - for pennies at a time.

I am an author who is blind. My audio mystery titles include 'Young, 
good-looking, and brilliant!' [plot summary follows]:
Who says that success does not come with a price tag? Especially when there 
are secrets lurking in the background, and this was Senator Christian 
Jansen's downfall. There was one who did not want the senator to run as 
president because he would be too difficult to handle. Another wanted the 
senator dead for breaking his promise to an oil company. And a Mafia boss 
who felt that the senator would be dangerous to them as president.
Who could have done it? [plot summary ends] Other titles include 'The 
Million Dollar Mansion', 'The Kidnapper's Kid' and many more.

Visit www.donnajodhan.com to learn more, subscribe to my monthly newsletter 
or buy the audio mysteries direct at:
www.donnajodhan.com/store.html .

[Sponsored notice ends]


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2014 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Associate Editor: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 167 ends.] 