E-Access Bulletin, February 2014: ‘Unconscious bias’ against disabled IT job applicants; European Parliament urges stronger public web access law.
Sent:	 28 February 2014 16:13

++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 165, January 2014.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 165 Contents.

01: BCS To Tackle ‘Unconscious Bias’ Against Disabled IT
Job Applicants
- Institute targets unrepresentative recruitment.

02: European Parliament urges stronger public web access law
- Huge majority urges governments to ensure all sites covered.

+03: Audio Interaction For 'Swype' Virtual Keyboard App
- Enhanced features for smartphone text prediction system.

News in Brief: 04: Inclusion Price-tag – report estimates cost of
ensuring everyone has basic digital skills; 05: Collaboration
Crew - mobile technology forum; 06: Training Appeal: Fix the
Web seeks resources.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Eye Support - funding issues in England for eye-gaze
software; 08: Strings Attached? The free screenreader debate
continues; 09: Shared Spaces - GPS and outdoor navigation
query.

Section Three: Opinion - Technical support.
10: Escaping The Mousetrap: Clive Lever bemoans the lack of
awareness and knowledge among IT support staff about issues
faced by keyboard-only, non-mouse computer users.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: BCS To Tackle ‘Unconscious Bias’ Against Disabled IT
Job Applicants

Training to tackle “unconscious bias” against disabled job
applicants by recruitment staff at IT firms has been launched
by BCS, The Chartered Institute for IT.

The institute is to receive £18,000 of funding from Royal
Academy of Engineering to support bias training after signing
up to the academy’s Engineering Diversity Concordat (
http://www.raeng.org.uk/about/diversity/resources/eng_div_con
cordat.htm ). The training is aimed at tackling unconscious bias
affecting disability, race, sexual orientation, age, obesity and
gender.

About 300 BCS specialist group and branch committee
members will be trained initially by the end of 2015, with the
intention of ensuring those key individuals spread the learning
more widely throughout the institute’s membership.

“We are hard-wired to prefer people who look like us, sound
like us and share our interests”, Rebecca George, chair of the
BCS policy and public affairs board, told E-Access Bulletin
this week.

“Unconscious biases are simply our natural people preferences
but this can lead to us making poor decisions, particularly
around recruitment. It means that we are less likely to recruit
people who do not look or sound like us, and this can lead to a
workforce which doesn’t fully represent the demographics of
society.”

Examples of action to tackle bias include removing names and
photos from CVs and training interviewers in guarding against
unconscious bias, George said.

“The first step is to help individuals become aware of their
own unconscious bias which can be done through self-
assessment”, she said. “Our aim is to raise awareness of
unconscious bias through research, case studies and
explanations of what it is, as well explaining the gap between
explicit and implicit bias.”

To illustrate the urgency of the IT profession’s need for such
traning, George quoted diversity analyst Tinu Cornish, a
psychologist at consultancy Different With Difference, who
has said: “At the current rate of change it will be 2080 before
we elect a representative government, 2085 before we close the
gender pay gap, and probably never before we close the
disability employment gap”.

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=983 .


+02: European Parliament urges stronger public web access law.

Members of the European Parliament have voted by a huge
majority to beef up a proposed European Directive on the
Accessibility of Public Sector Bodies’ Websites.

This week MEPs backed a move by 593 votes to 40, with 13
abstentions, to require EU member states to ensure all public
websites are fully accessible, not just those in 12 categories
proposed by the European Commission such as social security
benefits and enrolment in higher education (see bit.ly/1jF3j99
).

The parliament also wants the new rules to apply to websites
run by private firms performing public tasks, such as energy
utility companies and companies providing outsourced public
services such as transport or health care.

According to the Parliament’s plan, an optional exemption
would be included in the private sector condition for small
businesses, however. This would mean companies employing
up to 12 people could be exempted from the new law if
member states wish. MEPs have proposed giving member states
one year to comply with the rules for new content and three
years for all existing content, with a further two years for live
audio content.

The vote constitutes the European Parliament’s first reading of
the proposed directive. The EU Council of Ministers, made up
of government ministers from all member states,  may now
accept, reject or adapt the recommendations, for further
subsequent discussion with Parliament.

In a statement following this week’s vote the European Blind
Union, an umbrella group of blidness associations from 43
countries including the RNIB in the UK, welcomed “ the strong
message sent by the European Parliament to EU governments”.

However it urged rapid action – “within days” – by the current
Greek Presidency of the EU to schedule meetings to discuss the
directive, something it says is currently not planned other than
in general terms.

“It is not enough for the Greek Presidency to have this
directive on their ‘to do' list”, EBU President Wolfgang
Angermann said in the statement. “If the presidency refuses to
organise a meeting to discuss the directive with member states
then they are effectively blocking the legislative process.

“When 92% of MEPs are calling for action, we believe that
council members should listen and engage… Failure to act will
delay new rules for many months and therefore be hugely
detrimental for the 30 million blind and partially sighted EU
citizens who struggle to access information and services
online”, Angermann said. “People with sight loss have been
shut out of the online world for far too long.”

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=986


+03: Audio Interaction For 'Swype' Virtual Keyboard App

The popular ‘Swype’ virtual keyboard app for Android
smartphones, designed to allow users to type more quickly and
effectively, has introduced audio accessibility features to its
latest version in a move which will benefit users with impaired
vision.

Users of the standard ‘Swype’ app type words by sliding a
finger across a virtual keyboard in a continuous motion,
beginning at the first letter and pausing briefly at each letter
they want to include, before lifting their finger at the end of
each word. The app then predicts the word, and correction
features help the process.

In the latest version of Swype, users can activate it to work
with Android’s ‘TalkBack’ and ‘Explore by Touch’
accessibility features so that individual letters and words are
spoken out loud to users as they slide their fingers across the
virtual keyboard.

Working in this ‘TalkBack’ mode also enables audio versions
of the predictive text and correction features. For example,
depending on what letters of a word have already been written,
users can move their fingers to the top of the smartphone
screen and scroll through lists of words suggested and spoken
by Swype, navigated using circular finger motions.

Similarly, Swype suggests words to the user depending on what
has been written, and will learn to recognise common choices.
Other app navigation, such as switching to the symbols and
punctuation menu, can also be managed using audio prompts.

The latest version of Swype also uses Dragon Dictation speech-
recognition software to allow users to dictate text to the app
rather than type. Swype can be purchased for a few pounds
through the Google Play platform or Amazon Appstore.

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=988 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Inclusion Price-tag: The cost of ensuring every adult in the
UK has basic digital skills by 2020 – including the ability to
use email, browse the web and use online shopping and
government services – would be £875 million, a new report
estimates. The study, published by national digital inclusion
bodies the Tinder Foundation and Go ON UK, covers all 11
million adults who currently lack such skills, including people
with disabilities. It urges government, the private and voluntary
sectors to work together to cover the training costs, which it
says are needed on top of all current planned activity in this
field. The report estimates the cost of training for each person
will range from £47 up to £319 depending on various factors
including disability:
http://www.tinderfoundation.org/nation2020

+05: Collaboration Crew: An online community to enable
people working across all sectors to collaborate on projects to
help mobile technology make a positive impact in the lives of
older people and people with disabilities was launched this
month. Get Tech Collaboration Crew is a project of community
interest company the You Can Hub and was founded by social
technology innovators Mel Findlater and Adam Gill. The
project is inviting everyone from app developers to usability
experts, social entrepreneurs, the older community and the
disability community to come together and share ideas. For
invitations to online and offline discussions, sign up at:
 http://www.get-tech.org

+06: Training Appeal: The Fix the Web project – a service
which allows anyone to report accessibility problems with
websites, and recruits volunteers to liaise with site developers
to fix them – is launching an appeal for information on
accessibility training resources. The project has invited E-
Access Bulletin readers to email in information about training
courses, tutorials, useful sites, articles and blogs on
accessibility training, both technical and non-technical. Please
send ideas with a brief note and a web link where possible to
accessibility consultant and Fix the Web project partner
Graham Armfield, on:
graham.armfield@coolfields.co.uk
and for more information on Fix The Web, see:
http://www.fixtheweb.net

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Captioning.

Bee Communications has joined the Ai-Media group and is
now able to offer classroom, lecture, meeting or event
captioning on the game-changing Ai-Live platform. Real-time
captions are streamed to a web-enabled device, and a transcript
can also be provided after each session. The system is
optimised for tablet use, with significant improvements to
dictionary and transcript functionality, enhanced security, and
an accessible caption viewer including dyslexic fonts and
optimised colour palettes.

Captioning helps people learn and interact by providing
equality of access to live content. For more information, please
contact:
beth.abbott@ai-live.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

+07: Eye Support: Two readers wrote in to respond to last
issue’s request for information on retina software to navigate
an iPad, sent in by Alick Mackenzie of Enabled City
(www.enabledcity.com) to help the father of a friend who has
multiple sclerosis.

Gary Derwent, joint head of assistive and rehabilitation
technology at the Royal Hospital for Neuro-disability, wrote in
to say: “The funding situation for eye-gaze technology in the
NHS in England is very tricky right now. Some parts of the
contry can get some funding and others cannot.

“We hope things will be better from the start of April, but right
now we don't know for sure. There is a lot of politics and
commissioning activity going on right now and the outcome
remains uncertain.”

Health data accessibility campaigner Howard Leicester adds a
little more detail to this analysis. He says: “Variations on
funding are due to local politics; potentially competing calls on
limited funds; and guiding documents (such as Joint Strategic
Needs Assessments) which cover local population health and
social needs, but often ignore the scale and characteristics of
disability requirements.

“Extra-specialist services are not commissioned by Clinical
Commissioning Groups led by GPs or by councils, but (I
believe) directly by NHS England. Specialist services are
grouped around Clinical Reference Groups (CRGS), with
services commissioned and delivered in regional areas across
England.

“Assistive technologies such as eye-gaze technology is covered
under the group serving trauma patients, Group D, Howard
says. Information can be found online under the heading
‘Complex disability equipment - Alternative/Augmentative
communications technology’ at:
http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/commissioning/spec-
services/npc-crg/group-d/d01/

“I don't think there are any details of what's provided, but you
can see who's broadly responsible”, he says. “Note that reps
are still being recruited for this CRG and its sub-components.”

Readers should please send any further comments in this field
to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Strings Attached? Our regular correspondent Brian Gaff,
from the Kingston upon Thames Association for the Blind,
writes in to comment on the news we reported last issue that
software developer GW Micro had reached a deal with
Microsoft to give away its Window-Eyes screen reader
software for free.

“I feel [the Window-Eyes offer] is not as good as it sounds”,
Brian writes. “When people want a
screenreader, they often try them out and decide on what is
best for them. Now we have Microsoft saying ‘this one is free
if you pay for our Office package’, so lots of people will make
do with it, and not try the others.”

He writes that it is also unfair to bundle together mentions of
the two free screenreaders Thunder and NVDA, since NVDA
is has been more extensively developed than Thunder. “NVDA
now supports touch in Windows 8, and has better support for
many other programs, and a team of add on writers making it
work with other software.

“So really NVDA still has many things to make it worthwhile.
Additionally of course, not everyone can afford Microsoft
Office in the first place, and work between [free open source
office software] LibreOffice, Open Office and NVDA teams
are gradually cracking this.

“Incidentally, You mentioned in your piece, the voice
synthesiser Eloquence. As far as I am aware, this is now only
bundled with [certain commercial] products. It is not available
to buy. It would be great if someone  outside could investigate
the situation here. I personally find the voice sounds like a
person with a clothes peg on their nose, but many do like it.”

Further comments please to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+09: Shared Spaces: The same reader, Brian Gaff, adds a
request for comments on a separate topic, to which our readers
may like to respond. He asks if modern consumer satellite
location technologies (GPS) are now accurate enough to keep
blind people safe in shared or partially shared outdoor streets
or areas – partly pedestrianised areas where cars can pass
through, and where there are no tactile indications of the safe
areas.

“So on a street, usually a shopping street, where there are no
kerbs, but cars are only allowed between lines, could GPS be
used to warn a blind person that they are about to go into the
shared area?

“I suspect not, but it was a suggestion brought up by a traffic
engineer  of  our council the other day. Presumably he did not
want to have to dig up his pretty street to put in tactile chevrons
or whatever.”

Responses please to inbox@headstar.com .

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored notice: Audio book mysteries to relax and enjoy

More and more people are using audio books to relax, and to
develop and stimulate their imaginations. My name is Donna J.
Jodhan and since 2010 I have been using my audio mysteries
to help thousands from around the world to do just that – for
pennies at a time.

I am an author who is blind. My audio mystery titles include
‘Young, good-looking, and brilliant!’ [plot summary follows]:
Who says that success does not come with a price tag?
Especially when there are secrets lurking in the background,
and this was Senator Christian Jansen's downfall. There was
one who did not want the senator to run as president because
he would be too difficult to handle. Another wanted the
senator dead for breaking his promise to an oil company. And
a Mafia boss who felt that the senator would be dangerous to
them as president.
Who could have done it? [plot summary ends] Other titles
include ‘The Million Dollar Mansion’, ‘The Kidnapper’s Kid’
and many more.

Visit www.donnajodhan.com to learn more, subscribe to my
monthly newsletter or buy the audio mysteries direct at:
www.donnajodhan.com/store.html .

[Sponsored notice ends]


++Section Three: Opinion
Technical support.

+10: Escaping The Mousetrap
by Clive Lever.

Heard the one about the technological mousetrap?

No, not the play which has been running in the West End since
the 1950s: it’s the situation that has trapped people who
navigate computers using just the keyboard –not the mouse –
for far too long. It’s time to solve this case.

The pace of technology change in the work place is growing
ever faster, and wherever there are changes, there are
inevitably teething troubles. These in turn drive up the need for
people to call their technology help desks when things go
wrong, or when it’s not obvious how to change software
settings.

Whatever the reason for contacting them, the majority of
support engineers can answer the query for mouse users in
about ten seconds flat. However, when the caller says they
need to perform the action using only the keyboard shortcuts,
more often than not the engineer runs off to find who knows
something about this, and the caller is put on hold.

When the support officer returns, his or her next gambit
generally begins with the dreaded “unfortunately”, and ends
with a call being logged to have the problem looked into. What
happens next is someone usually emails you back the
following day with the answer you would have got instantly if
you had been a mouse user.

It may not be possible to consider training all IT support
engineers to be experts in the detailed use of keystrokes, or in
meeting the needs of people who use access technology. It
would ease the frustration of those people though, if at least
one member of every support team could be trained in access
technology awareness and in using a computer without
touching the mouse, so that we don’t risk having to wait for a
day or so to get answers that would ordinarily be on hand
during the first call we make.

It would also be useful if all IT support engineers setting up
new software for people who do not use a mouse at least know
where keyboard shortcut lists can be found on the system – by
use of keystrokes.

They also need to know, at the very least, how letters are
highlighted to indicate what keystrokes will perform the
operation. It would even help if all IT support engineers knew
that, for example, you can jump to icons on your desktop, or
files in a tree structure, by typing in the first part of the names
of the items. It would appear that even this is often fresh news
to some technicians. So, it is so much easier to find items on
your desktop named “Word”, “Excel”, “Access” “Outlook”,
than it is to deal with them when all of their names have the
default prefix ‘Microsoft’, because the system administrators
do not know that this can be unhelpful.

One way or another, the matter of supporting non-mouse users
in the workplace needs to be addressed, or we risk having a
two-tier system of support, where mouse users get instant help,
and non-mouse users are trapped in a slow lane of tech
support.

Support query systems could even be structured so that access-
related calls automatically go to the top of the queue.

Either way, IT departments need to capture and make available
knowledge of the experience of working without a mouse as
they acquire it,  so non-mouse users are not forced to wait
unnecessarily for service while technicians go off and re-learn
what should already be known.

That is the technological mousetrap: and it is time to break free.

NOTE: Clive Clive Lever is a local government diversity and
equality officer. Views stated here are his own.

Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=992 .

[Section Three ends]



++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination
for accessibility discussion. The “site critiques” section has
helped hundreds of people improve their websites, with
members offering friendly, no nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from
beginner to guru. So whether you’re looking to learn more
about accessibility, want to help others and improve on your
own knowledge, or just to browse the archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2014 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Associate Editor: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 165 ends.] 