E-Access Bulletin, June 2014: One Voice launches election manifesto campaign; accessible gaming; ICT barriers for older people.
Sent:	 30 June 2014 09:38

++E-ACCESS BULLETIN

Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability

- ISSUE 169, June 2014.



A Headstar Publication.

http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the 
end).





++Issue 169 Contents.



01: One Voice launches 2015 election pledge campaign

- Politicians urged to back accessibility, through public petition



02: Accessible gaming guidelines win US award

- "Milestone" for international project.



03: Accessible digital tube map wins app design award

- principles apply to all map-making, say developers



News in Brief: 04: Be Resilient: social enterprise seeks video stories from 
young disabled people; 05: Action Stalled - call for EU accessibility law 
revival; 06: Human Factors - technical workshop results.



Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.

07: Election Glitches - problems with Canadian vote; 08: Unfit Booth - plus 
issues with UK elections; 09: Firefox Additives - more accessibility 
features of the web browser.



Section Three: Digital inclusion - Shifting barriers for older people.

10: Time for a change. Why do older people make less use of computers and 
digital services than younger people? Maybe not for the reasons you think - 
but there are real barriers, says Ann Bajina.



[Contents ends].





++Section One: News.



+01: One Voice launches 2015 election pledge campaign



A campaign urging all UK political parties to add digital accessibility 
pledges to their 2015 election manifestos has been launched by the One Voice 
for Accessible ICT Coalition.



The coalition is an umbrella group of organisations from all sectors 
including Leonard Cheshire Disability; BT; Middlesex University; Business 
Disability Forum and Barclays Bank.



Its new campaign has two main parts: a direct approach to the political 
parties and a petition on the open campaigns website '38 Degrees' 
(https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/building-an-inclusive-society).



It is centred on a call for "all political parties to reaffirm their 
previously stated goals for equal opportunities and economic growth, by 
adding a statement to their 2015 election manifestos pledging to improve 
access by people with disabilities to digital public services, the digital 
economy and the workplace.



It is vital that action is taken in this field now, to ensure we keep on top 
of the rising problem of digital discrimination."



In particular, the coalition is asking the main UK parties to pledge if 
elected to t review of anti-discrimination law to "see if it is fit for 
purpose in the digital age; and to see how existing laws, guidelines and 
standards on access to digital goods and services by disabled and older 
people can be better enforced across all sectors."



In background information published alongside the petition, the coalition 
notes that the government has already published reasonable accessibility 
guidelines in its Government Service Design Manual for the Digital by 
Default Service Standard 
(https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/user-centred-design/accessibility).



However, it warns: "We are concerned that such messages are still not 
strongly enough promoted or enforced across the whole of government. And 
outside central government, in local government and the NHS for example, the 
pattern of accessibility of digital services is even more patchy.



"It is also a concern that the Equality and Human Rights Commission, which 
was set up in 2006 with a mandate to "challenge discrimination", has 
undertaken very little research, issued little guidance and carried out 
little enforcement work in this vital area. This is a clear indicator that 
review of anti-discrimination law enforcement in this field is urgently 
needed."



Andy Heath, a consultant on digital accessibility (http://axelafa.com) and 
One Voice council member who is running the petition on behalf of the 
coalition, told E-Access Bulletin this week: "Technology can serve us all, 
or if we let it, it can serve only the few. Accessibility of digital 
information in the UK is not a done deal, its a work in progress.



"I see the support of the next government it as crucial to the progress of 
inclusion and accessibility in the UK and making a high level manifesto 
statement would show a commitment to that. We need the policy vision out 
there in view so all can see, not buried in a dusty filing cabinet. Whether 
you believe competition between people, organisations and nations, is a good 
way to go or not, we cannot afford to waste the talents of any of our people 
by excluding them - for their sakes and ours."



Heath urged all readers of E-Access Bulletin to sign the petition (The 
petition, Building an Inclusive Society

https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/building-an-inclusive-society), and 
promote it on social media and through other channels, as the parties enter 
the final stages of their manifesto-setting processes this summer.



NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1043 .





+02: Accessible gaming guidelines win US award



A set of international guidelines to make computer games more accessible to 
gamers with disabilities has won an award from the US-based Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC).



The Game Accessibility Guidelines 
(http://www.gameaccessibilityguidelines.com) won the intellectual and 
developmental disabilities category of the annual FCC Chairman's Awards for 
Advancements in Accessibility.



Launched in 2012, the guidelines were created by an international group of 
game developers, accessibility specialists and academics and cover six 
categories of impairment: general, motor, cognitive, vision, hearing and 
speech, and are divided into three levels of complexity: basic, intermediate 
and advanced.



Examples of guidelines at different levels of complexity include basic: to 
provide details of accessibility features on game packaging or website; 
intermediate: to allow difficulty level to be altered during gameplay; and 
advanced: to allow settings to be saved to different profiles, at either 
game or platform level.



Ian Hamilton, an independent user experience designer and consultant from 
the UK who contributed to the guidelines' development, told E-Access 
Bulletin: "Having a US government body make such a public statement about 
the importance of accessible recreation is a great milestone.



"It is recognition that other people are actually listening and paying 
attention, and they do value the work that various groups of advocates for 
game accessibility are doing to advance the field."



Since launching in 2012, the guidelines have been constantly developed and 
updated as a "living document" following feedback from gamers and 
developers. There is a continual open call to contact the authors, to keep 
the guidelines as inclusive as possible.



Hamilton said he hopes the FCC award will help bring to prominence what 
remains a niche area in the field of digital accessibility.



"We've seen some pretty rapid development in the past couple of years, but 
the industry is still way, way behind others", he said. "Despite the 
progress that is being made, by far the biggest barrier to accessibility in 
gaming is just a simple lack of awareness amongst developers. So anything at 
all that results in more conversation about it is always a fantastic thing."



In an article on the guidelines written in a previous issue of E-Access 
Bulletin (June 2013 - see http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=891 ), Hamilton 
wrote that research commissioned in 2008 by US video game developer PopCap 
( http://bit.ly/PYsRwl ) found a higher proportion of people with 
disabilities among gamers than in the general population.



"Games can be a huge contributor to quality of life for people who have 
limited recreation options, but they also enable access to culture and 
socialising, and can have therapeutic benefits", the article found. "In 
multiplayer games and virtual worlds, everyone is able to participate on a 
level playing field, with players' first impressions of someone being based 
on how they play the game and what they say, not on any disability they may 
have."



NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1040 .





+03: Customisable digital tube train map wins design award



A customisable version of the London Underground map for people with 
impaired vision has won best transport app in this month's UK Mobile and App 
Design Awards, hosted by design100 
(http://appdesignawards.co.uk/UKAPPS14/entry_details.asp?ID=12734&Category_ID=5615).



"Colourblind tube map" was created by digital agency 232 Studios - which 
also won best small studio - working with accessibility specialist Ian 
Hamilton, also known for his work on accessible video game guidelines (see 
previous story, this issue).



The app is based on the official tube map - "it took some tough licensing 
negotiations to allow that", Hamilton says  - and offers combinations of 
colours and patterns which are easier to read by users with different forms 
of colourblindness.



Other versions are designed to cater for other vision impairments such as 
cataracts, loss of contrast sensitivity and myopia, with features including 
increased contrast; reduced glare; large detailed high-zoom maps; 
customisable text size; and simple interfaces with no fiddly gestures



The app previously won a Judges' Award in last December's Transport for 
London (TfL) accessible app awards, with the prize money from this helping 
ensure it could be made available to both Apple and Android users free of 
charge, Hamilton told E-Access Bulletin.



"The iconic London underground map is relied on by millions of travellers 
every day, but its white background, small text and low contrast differences 
in colour can cause problems for people with many different types of 
impaired vision", the app's developers say.



"There is a black and white pattern-based map available, but only as a 
PDF... [but this] is actually left over from the time before colour printing 
became cheaply available, it isn't actually designed for colour-blindness, 
so the first enhancement was to produce something that was actually tailored 
to that audience, that combined colour with pattern to create something 
ideally suited to people who see in a restricted palette.



"Additionally, due to our past experience working on video magnifier 
software, another use soon became apparent. A pattern based map is free from 
being constrained by colour choice, meaning those colours can be altered to 
suit the preferences of people with a wide range of different vision 
impairments."



The approach taken to develop the app is an example of the benefits digital 
technology can bring to all kinds of impairments, the developers say. "The 
tube map in the station is a physical object that has to compromise to work 
for as many people as possible, but digital products do not have the same 
constraints. Interfaces can be customised, the best solution tailored to 
each individual's need."



The same basic principles are also applicable to all map design, they say, 
and there has been interest in the project from across the cartography 
community. "Using symbols and pattern as well as colour, or providing high 
detail imagery that can in turn support a high level of zoom; these are 
things that are applicable to all maps."



Other winners of December's TfL accessible app competition included London's 
Nearest Bus, which helps people find what bus stop they are at and when the 
next bus will arrive; Station Master, which offers detailed train and 
station access information for tube and overground lines; and Tube Tracker, 
an app that uses text-to-speech and high colour contrast to ease access to 
live journey information.



NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1038 .





++News in Brief:



04: Be Resilient: A social enterprise which aims to help young disabled 
people share advice by telling stories about their lives is appealing for 
video clips to be used in a pilot TV programme. 'bResilient' is inviting 
young people (aged 25 or under) with disabilities - working alone or with 
friends, carers or family - to make video clips of up to three minutes 
telling stories about experiences connected with the arts or creating 
artworks. "Whether you have been gripped by reading a compelling novel; 
collaborated to perform with a disability dance group; are a sculptor who is 
blind; or just want to speak about a TV programme which has affected you, we 
would like you to make a short video and send it to us (or send us a link to 
it)", the organisation says. "We will take the best and edit them into a 
single programme, with a presenter adding commentary." For more information 
or to send in your clips, contact James Plummer on:

james@prospectmsl.com





05: Action Stalled: The forthcoming Italian Presidency of the EU must 
implement a proposal for a Directive on the Accessibility of Public Sector 
Bodies' Websites, the European Disability Forum has urged. The forum, an 
umbrella organisation representing the interests of people with disabilities 
in Europe, said that despite the proposal being advanced over the past two 
years by the European Commission and the European Parliament, there has been 
no further progress in the European Council of Ministers during the last two 
presidencies of the EU under Lithuania and Greece. A clear political 
commitment is now needed to ensure rapid progress on the Directive during 
the Italian Presidency, which begins on 1 July, it said. "EDF regrets that 
the Greek Presidency failed to take this very important legislation further, 
and hopes that the forthcoming Italian presidency will treat the web 
directive as a priority... Non-binding political initiatives failed to make 
the web accessible for persons with disabilities. That is why this directive 
must cover all public websites as well as public services provided online, 
regardless of who owns the website, either it is a public or private entity":

http://www.edf-feph.org/



06: Human Factors: Developing digital interfaces for users with cognitive 
impairments and people with low or no literacy; ICT for an ageing 
population; and speech intelligibility in mobile networks were among topics 
addressed by the annual workshop on Human factors in ICT hosted by European 
technology standards body ETSI this month in Sophia Antipolis, France. ETSI 
has already achieved a milestone earlier this year with the publication of 
the first European Standard for accessible ICT (EN 301 549), intended to 
ensure that publicly procured websites, software, and digital devices are 
more accessible to persons with the widest range of abilities (see E-Access 
Bulletin, February 2014 http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1017 ). 
Presentations from the June workshop can be found online at:

http://www.etsi.org/news-events/events/737-etsi-hf-ws-2014



[Section One ends].





++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications

- Specialist Providers of Captioning.



Bee Communications has joined the Ai-Media group and is now able to offer 
classroom, lecture, meeting or event captioning on the game-changing Ai-Live 
platform. Real-time captions are streamed to a web-enabled device, and a 
transcript can also be provided after each session. The system is optimised 
for tablet use, with significant improvements to dictionary and transcript 
functionality, enhanced security, and an accessible caption viewer including 
dyslexic fonts and optimised colour palettes.



Captioning helps people learn and interact by providing equality of access 
to live content. For more information, please contact:

beth.abbott@ai-live.com .



[Sponsored Notice ends].







++Section Two: 'The Inbox'

- Readers' Forum.



+07: Election Glitches: Our regular correspondent and leading accessibility 
campaigner from Canada, Donna Jodhan, writes in to describe a recent voting 
experience following our "access to elections" special issue last month.



"On 12 June I voted in an Ontario Provincial election and whereas my 
expectation was that I would have had greater access to the voting process, 
I was disappointed", Donna writes.



"Before 12 June I had seen several commercials on TV where it was stated 
that the Ontario elections would be accessible in Braille, and I was looking 
forward to this new feature, but alas! The process was not fully accessible 
in Braille as had been advertised.



"The staff were extremely helpful and friendly and were very quick on the 
draw when I asked for a Braille template but here is where the good news 
ended. The template contained numbers in Braille but there was no Braille 
list of candidates. Accordingly, the returning officer had to read out the 
list of names to me and I had to ask her to do this twice as there were five 
names on the list and I wanted to make sure that I remembered them all along 
with the corresponding parties that they were representing.



"Everything else went smoothly. I was allowed to vote in secret and to fold 
my own ballot and place it in the ballot box but there was one last thing 
for me to report. There was no way for me to verify that I had indeed marked 
my ballot in the spot that I had wanted.



"A good first effort on the part of [provincial election agency] Elections 
Ontario, but there is more work to be done and hopefully by the next time an 
election rolls around, these glitches will have been rectified."



Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com .





+08: Unfit Booth: Our regular correspondent Brian Gaff, from the Kingston 
upon Thames Association for the Blind, writes in to describe his own recent 
voting experience, in the UK's recent European Parliamentary elections.



"I seem to be almost unique in my area to still go to a polling station", 
writes Brian. "It seems that most blind people around here either do a proxy 
or a postal vote, which is a little sad.



"Normally my borough is quite good at the access stuff, but I found this 
time all new people were there and the person who helped me did not even 
know they had to peel the backing off the plastic template, and had 
difficulty even reading the list in a good way. Still, we got there in the 
end.



"The booths used are not fit for purpose when you think that the European 
Parliament ballot paper had 17 parties on it and the booths were basically a 
circular card table with an X shaped divider, so four small triangular areas 
were all you had to put the ballot down on. One would have thought by now 
that at the very least a voting computer with headphones might have been in 
use!"



Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com .





+09: Firefox Additives: Another story from last month's issue, on 
accessibility features of the Firefox web browser, is the subject of further 
comment from Brian Gaff.



"On Firefox, I got the impression that the person  you had in the article 
was mainly interested in partial sighted use", Brian writes. "Due to Firefox 
being completely devoid of any audio cues, I now always install an add on 
called 'navigational sounds', which restores the clicks for links, the 
sounds for alerts and the ding for download completed as in Internet 
Explorer. This makes it a whole lot easier.



"Another thing which for me at least, is very important, is an advert 
blocker. Firefox add-ons also has one of those. It's not that I do not want 
adverts, but it seems to me that increasingly, advert creators screw up the 
sites they are used on by not making them in a way that agrees with 
screenreaders, often throwing them into strange parts of the page due to odd 
graphic and clever animation. It's about time they fixed their errant ways."



Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com .



[Section Two ends]





++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription

- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.



When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.



Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.



Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:

- One-stop shop for all formats

- Products quality-checked by users

- Corporate presentation including your house style

- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands

- Multi-format discounts

- Accessible packaging



Contact us at:

Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)

Email transcription@adept-uk.org



[Sponsored Notice ends]





++Section Three: Digital inclusion:

- Shifting barriers for older people.



+10: Time for a change

by Ann Bajina.



Why do older people make less use of computers and digital services than 
younger people?



Of course, there is the perception that they don't want to simply because 
the digital world is new, but I don't think that is always the reason. There 
are some real problems with access for older people.



Let's look first at the positives, as an older person myself - recognising 
that I couldn't do without my laptop now, having resisted buying one for a 
few years! It's great to be able to stay in touch with relatives and friends 
without needing to know if they are available to take a phone call, and 
without the feeling that a letter needs to contain important news. I have 
had health problems and have needed to report in to my daughter every 
morning and evening just to reassure her that I am OK. By email it is easy - 
I don't even need to know if she is up yet! And it's free, whether we are 
countries apart or next door.



Then mobile phones - what would we do without them now? I take issue with 
those friends who say they only use them in emergencies and switch them off 
otherwise - so my question is: so it's only an emergency you have that 
matters, not one someone else might have?



I understand they do not want to be fiddling with answering the phone in the 
middle of doing something else, and that's if they can actually find it - 
which leads to one of the difficulties for older people - hearing it ring in 
the first place! I think many older people find mobile phones intrusive, not 
helped by (mostly) younger people chatting at full volume on trains and 
buses! I haven't any experience yet with smart phones, for reasons I will 
describe shortly.



Other major positives for older people include remotely controlled burglar 
alarm systems, alarm systems on a phone to alert someone of health issues, 
and even for some people, games!



However, there are problems which get worse the older you get. Here are my 
main gripes.



Touch screens are a nice idea but almost impossible to use if you have shaky 
hands, and most of us do eventually.



Small devices are a problem as well, as we often can't read the screens. 
Even this Notebook computer I am using is difficult. It is rarely intuitive 
finding out how to increase the text size, and then there's no room on the 
screen without lots of scrolling. I've just found how to do it for this 
article!



Passwords and PIN numbers - another problem. We're told not to write them 
down but to have different ones for each application. I couldn't have 
remembered them if I'd obeyed this rule years ago, now it is impossible. 
Quite apart from issues such as failing memory, we now have so many.



Then there are constantly changing computer operating systems. I read a 
letter in the Saga magazine just this morning pleading for fewer of these. 
It nearly always depends on having some younger techie to explain and 
implement changes, and not all of us have access to such people. Even after 
a full career in IT I am seriously out of date and have no confidence in 
being able to deal with this problem. Associated with this is the cost of 
getting new hardware and software - many older people can't afford to change 
even if they wanted to.



Anti-virus systems are an even more complicated example of the above. And a 
particular irritation is being offered extra features on a trial basis and 
then not being able to say you don't want them.



Finally, spam is a nuisance for everyone, but it is counter-intuitive to 
expect older people to avoid putting details say of their email address on a 
form when asked to do so. We're much less likely to realise when this is 
risky. This leads to the issue of scare stories and hoaxes - I always advise 
my friends to check with Snopes.com before opening anything they don't 
recognise, and never to download anything they don't know about - but they 
don't know about software upgrades they need either!



In conclusion, there's quite a lot of education needed for my generation who 
mostly had almost no experience of computers in their working lives. But 
they are not going to do it - they don't see why they should and in any 
case, it just makes them recognise how little they know and how much can go 
wrong! And cost again is a factor.



So, what do we need? Fewer changes; cheaper support networks; clearer 
instructions on how to increase volume and text size and swap between mouse 
and touch screen systems; and older people serving in computer shops! And 
how about bringing back paper copies of manuals- if you don't know how to 
use your computer, how do you find the help system?



NOTE: Ann Bajina worked for more than 50 years in IT, and is now gratefully 
retired.



Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1035



[Section Three ends]





++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum

- Accessibility Discussion.



Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination for 
accessibility discussion. The "site critiques" section has helped hundreds 
of people improve their websites, with members offering friendly, no 
nonsense advice.



You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to 
guru. So whether you're looking to learn more about accessibility, want to 
help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to browse the 
archives, head over to:



http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .



[Special notice ends].





++Sponsored notice: Audio book mysteries to relax and enjoy



More and more people are using audio books to relax, and to develop and 
stimulate their imaginations. My name is Donna J. Jodhan and since 2010 I 
have been using my audio mysteries to help thousands from around the world 
to do just that - for pennies at a time.



I am an author who is blind. My audio mystery titles include 'Young, 
good-looking, and brilliant!' [plot summary follows]:

Who says that success does not come with a price tag? Especially when there 
are secrets lurking in the background, and this was Senator Christian 
Jansen's downfall. There was one who did not want the senator to run as 
president because he would be too difficult to handle. Another wanted the 
senator dead for breaking his promise to an oil company. And a Mafia boss 
who felt that the senator would be dangerous to them as president.

Who could have done it? [plot summary ends] Other titles include 'The 
Million Dollar Mansion', 'The Kidnapper's Kid' and many more.



Visit www.donnajodhan.com to learn more, subscribe to my monthly newsletter 
or buy the audio mysteries direct at:

www.donnajodhan.com/store.html .


[Sponsored notice ends]





++End Notes.



+How to Receive the Bulletin.



To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email

eab-subs@headstar.com

with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.



Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:

dan@headstar.com .



Copyright 2014 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .

The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:

http://www.headstar.com/eab

is also cited.



+Personnel:

Editor: Dan Jellinek.

Associate Editor: Tristan Parker.

Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.



ISSN 1476-6337.



[Issue 169 ends.]
