E-Access Bulletin, March 2014: Standard to make 'rich' web content accessible; UK councils; Mobile access database.
Sent:	 31 March 2014 09:58

++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 166, March 2014.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the 
end).


++Issue 166 Contents.

01: New standard aims to make 'rich' web content accessible
Web Accessibility Initiative tackles interactive navigation tools

02: Only a quarter of UK council websites accessible, report finds
- Compliance levels significantly lower than last year.

03: Global mobile accessibility database set for overhaul
- expansion to cover tablets, smartphones and assistive apps

News in Brief: 04: Learning Signs - automated sign language recognition; 05: 
Spanish Eyes - GW Micro launches Window-Eyes language version; 06: Social 
Survey - special needs questionnaire.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Irrational Fear - discrimination stems from ignorance; 08: Thunder 
Rumbles: free screenreader debate; 09: Remote Control - IT support problems 
for keyboard-only users.

Section Three: Case Study - Access Dorset.
10: Citizen journalists find their voice on the virtual high street: Tristan 
Parker reports on a project helping people with disabilities help each other 
with short videos on independent living.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: New standard aims to make 'rich' web content accessible

A new technical standard to ensure so-called 'rich' web content - dynamic, 
interactive features of many modern web pages - can be made more accessible 
to people with disabilities have been published by the international World 
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI).

The Accessible Rich Internet Applications 1.0 specification (WAI-ARIA - 
http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/aria ) has become a W3C 'Recommendation' - the 
body's term for an official standard.

The new group of documents includes a technical specification and primer for 
developers of web technologies and developers of assistive technologies. It 
covers complex web navigation techniques created using technologies that can 
run applications inside web pages such as Ajax and JavaScript. These include 
'tree controls' - menus that expand or collapse in a tree-like structure; 
'drag-and-drop' functionality such as slider controls; and content that 
changes over time such as progress bars.

WAI-ARIA sets out ways such content can be identified, described and 
controlled by users of assistive technology such as screenreaders, or people 
who cannot use a mouse. For example it offers a framework for drag-and-drop 
feature properties that describe drag sources and drop targets.

The new standard is designed to help implement existing web accessibility 
standards such as WAI's own Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 
in a modern context, W3C WAI director Judy Brewer told E-Access Bulletin.

"WAI-ARIA is essentially one way of meeting WCAG 2.0," Brewer said. "The 
principles, guidelines and success criteria from WCAG 2.0 remain remarkably 
stable - so the "rules," so to speak, haven't changed. It's just that there 
are now more powerful ways to use those in websites and applications because 
of the availability of ARIA."

One of the benefits of creating the new ARIA standard and implementation 
guidance is to ensure developers do not needlessly work in parallel creating 
their own accessibility solutions for each new interactive web feature, she 
said.

"Without the WAI-ARIA technology, developers would have to customize their 
accessibility solutions for different platforms and devices. With ARIA, they 
get cross-device, cross-platform accessibility support, and can more easily 
repurpose their content and applications in different settings without 
losing any accessibility support."

The specification will now evolve, with a working draft of WAI-ARIA 1.1 
already published for consultation ahead of an even stronger 2.0 version, as 
her team continues to watch how technology changes and keep ahead in the 
race for accessibility, Brewer said.

"The constant emergence of new technologies requires a lot of vigilance on 
the part of accessibility experts and advocates", she said.

"There's still a tendency for developers of new technologies to forget that 
people using the web have varied physical, sensory and cognitive 
capabilities - and that the digital medium provides such an excellent 
platform for accommodating all of these variations in human functioning if 
one just remembers to plan for it at the design stage."

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=998 .


+02: Only a quarter of UK council websites accessible, report finds

Only a quarter of UK local authority websites are accessible to people with 
disabilities, significantly fewer than last year, according to this year's 
'Better Connected' council website review by the public sector Society of IT 
Management (Socitm).

Overall, 105 councils (26%) were rated by the Socitm report as at least 
'satisfactory', defined as having few serious and practical accessibility 
problems, with just one- Preston City - rated 'very good'. Last year, 194 
councils (44%) were rated at this level.

Some 311 sites (76%) this year were rated as 'poor', and 12 (3%) as entirely 
'inaccessible', according to tests checks carried out for Socitm by 
non-profit accessibility testing firm Digital Accessibility Centre, based on 
the WCAG 2.0 global web access standard. The tests checked website 'top 
level' pages - the main index pages for each council service - as well as 
the accessibility of carrying out sample tasks such as reporting flytipping 
to a council using a mobile phone; or finding out about a care home for an 
elderly relative.

The drop in standards this year is attributed by the report to the 
introduction of accessibility tests on the site carried out using mobile 
devices, which resulted in scores on average only half as good as those 
recorded in tests using desktop computers.

The most common accessibility problems for council websites accessed by 
desktop computer were lack of clear labels for form fields and associated 
controls; downloadable 'non-html' documents such as pdf files being 
inaccessible; poor heading structure; and insufficient colour contrast. For 
access by mobile devices, common problems also included a lack of mobile 
alternative option for the desktop site.

The report (http://www.socitm.net/research/socitm-insight/better-connected ) 
recommends all councils should build accessibility into their criteria for 
web site procurement; build accessibility checks into their web publishing 
process; and carry out user testing with disabled people.

The figures emerged just a few days after the European Parliament voted to 
strengthen a proposed European Directive on the Accessibility of Public 
Sector Bodies' Websites, which would require EU member states to ensure all 
public websites are fully accessible.

The new law could come into force as early as next year, suggesting UK 
councils would struggle to comply, although member states would be likely to 
be allowed a further year to comply for new public sector web content, and 
three years for existing content (see E-Access Bulletin, February 2014 
issue).

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1000 .


+03: Global mobile accessibility database set for overhaul

The world's leading database of information on the accessibility features of 
mobile phones and tablet computers is set to be refreshed with extensive new 
information, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

GARI (Global Accessibility Reporting Initiative - 
http://www.mobileaccessibility.info ) was launched in 2010 by the Mobile 
Manufacturers Forum (MMF), an international association of mobile 
telecommunications equipment manufacturers.

Initially covering just a few accessibility features for mobile phones, it 
has since been expanded to store information on more than 100 features of 
phones and tablet computers of interest to users with access issues relating 
to dexterity; vision; hearing/speech; and cognition.

Last year it was further expanded to include 'apps' (applications) that help 
to make mobile devices more accessible such as screenreaders, or help people 
with disabilities to perform everyday tasks such as TapTapSee, an app which 
can use a phone's camera to identify objects and speak them out loud.

The resource - which covers all global regions - was developed with 
international disability organisations including World Blind Union, European 
Disability Forum, World Federation of the Deaf. It holds information in 12 
written and spoken languages plus American Sign Language with a 13th 
language, Japanese, to be added shortly.

It was originally set up because accessibility information on consumer 
devices seemed to be getting lost on the way to the user, Sabine Lobnig, 
communications and regulatory officer at the MMF, told E-Access Bulletin. 
"Manufacturers had feedback from disability organisations that even if they 
do provide accessibility information for devices, this information does not 
usually arrive with the end consumer", Lobnig said.

"Whether it is sold through a wholesaler, on the internet or wherever, 
information on accessibility is lost. So consumers end up with a device that 
could be accessible for them but they do not have the information."

Another purpose for GARI is to act as an official compliance reporting 
mechanism for mobile manufacturers in countries such as Australia, Portugal 
and the US where legal accessibility requirements are already in place, she 
said. The system pulls in data to templates designed to meet the 
requirements of each country's relevant law. In Europe, no such legal 
requirements currently exist at EU or national level, though an EU 
accessibility act currently in development might introduce them in future.

The GARI dataset available for organisations to embed in their own websites 
(free for non-commercial use); and acts as a platform where policy makers, 
industry and disability organisations can exchange information and work 
together on improving accessibility of mobile phones, tablets and apps.

Its main data store is reviewed every 12-18 months with the most recent 
consultation with suppliers and disability organisations being held in 
November 2013, Lobnig said. The results were then considered with new 
features set to be agreed by the GARI management team next week, she said.

GARI is free to use and developers list apps for free, though manufacturers 
pay to have their hardware products included.

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1002 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Learning Signs: A computer programme that can recognise sign language 
and convert it into text or speech; and conversely convert text and speech 
into sign language using an animated avatar has been developed by a Polish 
company, Migam. The project appears in an international 'Social Tech Guide' 
listing examples of technology for social good, compiled by charitable 
foundation the Nominet Trust.
According to a report by Dan Sutch and Ed Anderton of Nominet Trust 
published on the Real Business website, the Migam system uses neural network 
techniques to "learn" sign language from repeated inputs of sign language 
expressed both correctly and incorrectly many times over:
Short Link: http://bit.ly/1lf7ZTJ
Long link: 
http://realbusiness.co.uk/article/25799-6-inspirational-examples-of-european-tech-for-good

+05: Spanish Eyes: Software developer GW Micro has announced it has launched 
a Spanish language version of its screenreader software Window-Eyes through 
a collaboration with the M&B Trading Company 
(http://www.mb-internet-ideas.com ), an IT company based in Mexico. The news 
follows GW Micro's announcement earlier this year that it had reached a deal 
with Microsoft to give away Window-Eyes for free. The Spanish version will 
come under this free deal, though the firm says customers seeking training 
for the version will need to contact M&B. A paid version is also available 
with unlimited technical support:
Short Link: http://bit.ly/1h8GgyZ
Long link: http://www.gwmicro.com/News_&_Events/Latest_News/?newsNo=305

+06: Social Survey: Academics at Middlesex University are conducting an 
online survey into the use of social networking by vulnerable young adults 
who may have special needs, learning disabilities or mental health issues. 
The purpose of the questionnaire is to ascertain what research, if any, is 
happening in this area with a view to either support it or develop research 
proposals to fill the gaps. The long term goal is to raise awareness of the 
need to improve inclusion on social networks through education, legislation, 
or the development of standards and resources. Readers are invited to take 
part, at:
http://www.surveymonkey.com/s/3886P5S

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Captioning.

Bee Communications has joined the Ai-Media group and is now able to offer 
classroom, lecture, meeting or event captioning on the game-changing Ai-Live 
platform. Real-time captions are streamed to a web-enabled device, and a 
transcript can also be provided after each session. The system is optimised 
for tablet use, with significant improvements to dictionary and transcript 
functionality, enhanced security, and an accessible caption viewer including 
dyslexic fonts and optimised colour palettes.

Captioning helps people learn and interact by providing equality of access 
to live content. For more information, please contact:
beth.abbott@ai-live.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

+07: Irrational Fear: Reader Hugh McLeod writes in with a personal response 
to our lead news story last issue, "BCS to tackle 'unconscious bias' against 
disabled IT job applicants", which reported on a new scheme to combat 
unconscious discrimination against disabled people.

"Fear of blindness, like fear of falling or of drowning, is natural" writes 
Hugh. "But like so many natural fears, fear of blindness among the sighted 
is irrational or ignorant bigotry.

"Yesterday I told my 64-year-old brother that a blind man on a flat roof is 
at no more risk than a sighted man. The danger for both arises from getting 
on or off the roof and from pure stupidity. But my brother, after more than 
half a century still loves me and does not understand that my blindness is 
just part of me.

"I think most sighted people, and too many blind people, refuse to see. Like 
racism, sexism and any other phobia or "-ism", the demeaning of the blind is 
due to unexamined ignorance."

Please send further comments to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Thunder Rumbles: Roger Wilson-Hinds, director of Screenreader.net which 
has developed free screenreader software Thunder, writes in to respond to a 
comment in last issue's Inbox from our reader Brian Gaff. Brian in turn was 
commenting on our previous news report that software developer GW Micro had 
reached a deal with Microsoft to give away its Window-Eyes screen reader 
software for free. Brian had suggested this offer was "not as good as it 
sounds", since it may mean people 'making do' with Window-Eyes because it is 
free, when other screenreaders may be better for them.

However, Roger counters: "The current screenreader position for blind and 
visually disabled people has never been better. Now we have choice: 
Window-Eyes free with up-to-date Microsoft software; JAWS widely used in the 
work and education situation; NVDA up to date and becoming more and more 
sophisticated; Guide for the less technical; and our Thunder,  getting on 
and out of date but easy to use on old machines. Not to mention the Mac, 
when Apple were the first to integrate our needs into the bowels of their 
system.

"Why grumble? We are spoiled for choice, and many of us spend more time on 
our mobiles or tablets than on the PC, in any case."

Please send further comments to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+09: Remote Control: Meanwhile our same trusty correspondent Brian Gaff 
writes in with his response to last issue's feature by Clive Lever about a 
lack of awareness among IT support staff of issues faced by keyboard-only 
computer users.

"One thing Clive does not mention in his piece is the increasing use by 
support staff of remote desktop systems", Brian writes.

"I have run across this quite a bit and the pitfall here is they offer to 
sort out a problem you have, but in doing so, often change settings without 
telling you, so the software is no longer configured as it was before, and 
this can under some circumstances mean another call just afterwards asking 
for it to be changed back again.

"There is another issue here too: if a blind person nowadays wants to apply 
for a job as a support engineer, it is often specified that they must be 
able to use these remote access programs, and sadly I know of none that can 
actually be used by blind people, unless there is a screenreader on the 
remote machine itself."

Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com .

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored notice: Audio book mysteries to relax and enjoy

More and more people are using audio books to relax, and to develop and 
stimulate their imaginations. My name is Donna J. Jodhan and since 2010 I 
have been using my audio mysteries to help thousands from around the world 
to do just that - for pennies at a time.

I am an author who is blind. My audio mystery titles include 'Young, 
good-looking, and brilliant!' [plot summary follows]:
Who says that success does not come with a price tag? Especially when there 
are secrets lurking in the background, and this was Senator Christian 
Jansen's downfall. There was one who did not want the senator to run as 
president because he would be too difficult to handle. Another wanted the 
senator dead for breaking his promise to an oil company. And a Mafia boss 
who felt that the senator would be dangerous to them as president.
Who could have done it? [plot summary ends] Other titles include 'The 
Million Dollar Mansion', 'The Kidnapper's Kid' and many more.

Visit www.donnajodhan.com to learn more, subscribe to my monthly newsletter 
or buy the audio mysteries direct at:
www.donnajodhan.com/store.html .

[Sponsored notice ends]


++Section Three: Case Study
- Access Dorset.

+10: Citizen journalists find their voice on the virtual high street
by Tristan Parker.

A wheelchair user's struggle to use the car park at the town hall, to attend 
her brother's wedding; an elderly man's description of how he improved his 
diet to help his health; and one woman's tale of learning sign language to 
help others. These are all real examples of self-help and mutual support 
videos created by and for an inspirational project in the South West of 
England offering older people and people with disabilities peer support for 
independent living.

The online video project 'ADTV' ( http://www.accessdorsetcentre.org ) was 
launched by Access Dorset, a user-led charity partnership formed in 2010 by 
17 organisations across the county supporting people with disabilities, 
older people and carers.

The project's website features a 'virtual high street', with different areas 
representing different aspects of independent living such as transport, 
safety, money matters and leisure. Clicking on each of these topics takes 
the user to a series of videos made by the site's members sharing stories 
and experiences on that topic.

The videos are well-made, thanks to 'citizen journalism' skills such as 
writing a storyboard and producing a short video taught to some of the site's 
members by Bournemouth University. Members are also taught how to train 
others as citizen journalists, to help the project grow.

Dave Thompson, development manager at Access Dorset, told E-Access Bulletin 
the idea for the virtual high street and user-centred videos arose from 
extensive consultation with organisations that work with older people and 
those with disabilities.

"We're a small organisation without a huge amount of funding, so how do we 
go about making films that can actually tell those stories and produce them 
as cheaply as possible? That's where we came up with the idea of looking at 
the broader concept of citizen journalism", Thompson said.

Dr Einar Thorsen, senior lecturer in journalism and communication at 
Bournemouth University, has been taking a key role in teaching Access Dorset 
members the citizen journalism skills needed to produce their videos. "The 
project has different ways of empowering people", Thorsen told E-Access 
Bulletin.

Many of those making the videos are concerned about a lack of coverage or 
inefficient coverage of issues associated with disability, impairments and 
ageing in mainstream media, Thorsen said. "The website has an empowering 
function to give otherwise marginalised voices an ability to be heard, and 
that's quite a powerful thing", Thorsen said.

Funding for ADTV has arrived from a diverse range of national and local 
funders and sponsors. The Office for Disability Issues has provided grant 
funding, and organisations can sponsor individual sections of the virtual 
high street: Bluebird Care in Dorset sponsor the 'Our Home' section and 
Castlepoint Shopping Park in Bournemouth sponsor 'Leisure'.

In the longer term, Thompson said there is "a possibility of replicating and 
broadening out" the project in other parts of the UK, although the current 
focus is on developing it around Dorset. "We've already had a few 
conversations about the possibility of how we could take the concept and 
share it with others", he said. "We need to look at different ways of 
funding the project, and part of that is scaling up."

Coming soon to a virtual high street near you?

Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1006 .

[Section Three ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination for 
accessibility discussion. The "site critiques" section has helped hundreds 
of people improve their websites, with members offering friendly, no 
nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to 
guru. So whether you're looking to learn more about accessibility, want to 
help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to browse the 
archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2014 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Associate Editor: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 166 ends.] 