E-Access Bulletin, May 2014: Access to elections, voting and democracy - Special Issue; plus Firefox accessibility.
Sent:	 30 May 2014 17:43

++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 168, May 2014.

ACCESS TO ELECTIONS - SPECIAL ISSUE

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .
Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the 
end).


++Issue 168 Contents.

01: Elections 'inaccessible for many disabled citizens'
- Voting information websites inaccessible, says EU research body.

02: Joysticks and 3-D printing among election access prototypes
- but US foundation says voting access work must never cease.

03: Election access at heart of Canadian disability law campaign
- Group of leading activists urges all political parties to act.

News in Brief: 04: Good Shortlist: Tech4Good Awards finalists announced; 05: 
Audio Immersion - accessibility built into standard for streaming audio; 06: 
Tap App - TapTapSee released for Android.

Section Two: Q & A - Ken Saunders, AccessFirefox.org .
07: Community Service: Ken Saunders, the volunteer behind a key community of 
coders and developers promoting accessibility of one of the world's leading 
web browsers, Firefox, answers questions on his work, motivations and 
passions.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: EU elections 'inaccessible for many disabled citizens'

"Inaccessible and cumbersome administrative processes" including 
inaccessible websites are preventing people with disabilities in Europe from 
voting in elections, according to a new report by the European Union Agency 
for Fundamental Rights (FRA), an EU advisory research body.

The report, published this month, examined how well the political rights of 
persons with disabilities are being upheld across Europe, and found 
significant barriers exist to the exercise of these rights. "Gaps between 
the promise of law and policy and their actual implementation - for example 
in the form of inaccessible polling stations or websites - persist", it 
says.

Information on elections remains largely inaccessible to persons with 
disabilities, the report says, and official voting information websites in 
most EU member states do not appear to meet the minimum accepted standard 
for website accessibility, the international Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0.

The report can be accessed online. Short link:
http://bit.ly/1vQFhOY .
Full link:
http://fra.europa.eu/en/publication/2014/indicators-political-participation-persons-disabilities .

In a move linked to publication of the FRA report, the European Disability 
Forum (EDF) urged EU member states to remove restrictions that were 
preventing persons with disabilities from voting in the run-up to the recent 
European Parliament elections.

The forum, an independent international campaign group, also called on those 
European citizens with disabilities that were able to vote to do so, and 
exert their influence. The group published its own policy manifesto, "The 
key priorities of the disability movement" ( 
http://www.edf-feph.org/page_generale.asp?docid=33367 ), aimed at political 
parties across Europe. These include making goods and services accessible 
for all, through implementing the proposed EU directive on the accessibility 
of public websites.

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1029 .


+02: Joysticks and 3-D printing among election access prototypes

Voting with joysticks and 3-D printed accessible cases for tablet computers 
housing voting systems are among innovations presented in a new report on 
making elections more accessible for people with disabilities published this 
month by the US Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF).

"Innovations for accessible elections" ( 
http://www.itif.org/publications/innovations-accessible-elections ) assesses 
several years of ITIF research and development projects.

US elections make use of a range of electronic voting systems including 
touch-screen devices and although US law requires accessible alternatives to 
be offered such as audio, and tactile keys, many voters with disabilities 
still experience problems using these systems and with voting in general, 
the report finds.

As many as 47 million US citizens (almost one in four of the voting age 
population) face barriers to voting in person due to inaccessible devices, 
it says. Problems include a lack of accessible information about polling 
place locations; poll workers who do not recognise the needs of people with 
disabilities; electronic voting systems not set up for audio ballots; and 
keypads with confusing or unusual layouts and keys that are hard to identify 
by feel.

Recent innovation projects by ITIF with partners including the US Election 
Assistance Commission and the social innovation collaboration platform 
OpenIDEO have led to a range of ideas and prototypes to try to solve these 
problems.

They include a ballot designed for use on any device, codenamed the 
"Anywhere Ballot", presenting information in a clear reading order, at the 
place on the page or screen where the voter is already focused. Other work 
investigated use of a "smart joystick" as a universal voting control, after 
testing found the device can help individuals with a wide range of dexterity 
impairments.

Following these projects Los Angeles County, the most populous voting area 
in the US with almost 10 million residents, is using the Anywhere Ballot as 
the basis of its ballot redesign and is considering including a joystick as 
the tactile controller, the report says.

A voting system designed to be navigated using only two buttons with audio 
prompts, codenamed the "EZ Ballot", was another winner in an OpenIDEO voting 
challenge; as was an iPad case with additional accessibility features 
designed to enhance voting applications, such as tactile switches and a 
built-in stand to adjust the angle of the screen. The design for the 
accessible iPad case is now available online (see compressed Zip file at 
elections.itif.org/wp-content/uploads/ipad-voting-case.zip ) and can be 
built with a 3D printer, the report says.

Ideas such as these have shown promising results but with technology and 
election processes always changing, access work will always need to continue 
alongside, the report finds.

"While most elections are more accessible today than in years past, more 
progress is needed... [but] unfortunately, there is no simple solution", it 
says. "Creating accessible elections will require sustained research and 
funding to continue designing new technologies and processes, evaluating 
them in the field, and training election officials to use them."

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1026 .


+03: Election access at heart of Canadian disability law campaign

The removal of barriers to voting and elections is among key principles of a 
new Canadians With Disabilities Act which a group of Canadian disability 
rights advocates is urging all the country's main political parties to 
pledge to pass, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

The campaign is spearheaded by a group of five leading disability 
campaigners led by Donna Jodhan, who in 2012 won a six-year legal battle to 
force the Canadian government to makes its websites more accessible (see 
E-Access Bulletin September 2013 http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=932 ). 
Other members of the "Barrier-free Canada steering committee" are Steven 
Christianson, advocacy manager at baby health charity March of Dimes; David 
Lepofsky, a law professor at University of Toronto; Jutta Treviranus, 
director of the Inclusive Design Research Centre at Ontario College of Art & 
Design; and Marc Workman of the Canadian national blindness charity CNIB.

The group is urging all parties to support the principles behind passing a 
new law ahead of national elections set for October next year. "We believe 
more work is needed to ensure the rights of Canadians with disabilities 
remain intact", Jodhan told E-Access Bulletin this week. "Web accessibility 
is just one component of our landscape and if we hope to become an equal 
partner in society then other rights need to be respected and preserved. We 
need to have equity with the mainstream world."

The group has drawn up a list of 14 principles for the new law, which would 
echo the US Americans with Disabilities Act.

These include that it "should require providers... to ensure that their 
goods, services and facilities are fully usable by persons with 
 disabilities"; that the government of Canada should lead other sectors in 
achieving the aims of the new law; and that it should provide for a "prompt, 
independent  and effective process for enforcement".

The law should also require the government to review all current and future 
federal legislation and regulations to identify possible accessibility 
barriers that they may impose or permit, pass new legislation to address 
these barriers, the principles state. "As an immediate priority under these 
activities, the Government of Canada should get input from voters with 
disabilities on accessibility barriers in election campaigns and the voting 
process, and should develop reforms to remove and prevent such barriers."

The final principle says: "The Canadians with Disabilities Act must be more 
than mere window dressing... It must have real force, effect and teeth."

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1023 .


++News in Brief:

04: Good Shortlist: Therapy Box, an app development company that specialises 
in communication and therapy apps for people with communication 
difficulties, is among the finalists announced for this year's Tech4Good 
Awards, created by technology access charity AbilityNet with support from BT 
and other partners. Other finalists include Samsung Smart TV, which has 
built-in accessibility features including Voice Guide and a High Contrast 
User Interface; and SpecialEffect, a UK-based charity which helps anyone, 
whatever their physical disability, to enjoy video games and leisure 
technology. Youth Award nominees include Adam Pool, who with his mother has 
built MyPAL, a web-based information and resource centre to help families 
support a relative with dementia:
http://www.tech4goodawards.com/finalist/ .

05: Audio Immersion: Advanced accessibility features have been built into a 
new standard for streaming audio signals online and to mobile devices, the 
European ICT standards organisation ETSI has announced. ETSI has released 
AC-4 (ETSI TS 103 190), an audio compression standard designed to support 
sophisticated entertainment and other experiences on home entertainment 
devices, computers and mobile devices. The standard enables immersive and 
personalized consumer audio experiences, for example allowing viewers of a 
football match to hear sound from the stands or the field or change sound 
perspectives within a video game or film. And its accessibility features 
Advanced Dialogue Enhancement, offering users control of the dialogue level 
in relation to other sounds, suiting individual hearing needs and 
preferences; and Advanced Accessibility, allowing service providers to 
deliver secondary audio in 5.1 surround sound for the visually impaired:
http://www.etsi.org .

06: Tap App: TapTapSee, an app that can speak to identify common objects 
such as food tins or banknotes from photographs taken from any angle, has 
been made available for the first time on the Android mobile platform by its 
creator, Los Angeles-based company Image Searcher. The new app, of which a 
previous version on the Apple platform is already popular with blind and 
visually impaired people in the US, the UK and elsewhere, makes use of the 
Android text-to-speech facility Talkback for spoken identification. New 
users can take 20 pictures for free before being asked to subscribe to 
packages such as 50 pictures for $4.99 or  one month of unlimited pictures 
for $9.99:
http://www.taptapseeapp.com .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Bee Communications
- Specialist Providers of Captioning.

Bee Communications has joined the Ai-Media group and is now able to offer 
classroom, lecture, meeting or event captioning on the game-changing Ai-Live 
platform. Real-time captions are streamed to a web-enabled device, and a 
transcript can also be provided after each session. The system is optimised 
for tablet use, with significant improvements to dictionary and transcript 
functionality, enhanced security, and an accessible caption viewer including 
dyslexic fonts and optimised colour palettes.

Captioning helps people learn and interact by providing equality of access 
to live content. For more information, please contact:
beth.abbott@ai-live.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Two: Q & A
- Ken Saunders, AccessFirefox.org .

+07: Community Service.

Ken Saunders is co-owner and founder of AccessFirefox.org, a web portal of 
accessibility tools and resources for users of the free Firefox web browser. 
Here, the US-based volunteer answers questions on his work, motivations and 
passions.

Q: What accessibility tools do you use to facilitate your own work?

A: I am legally blind due to a congenital condition known as ocular albinism 
with nystagmus. My visual acuity is documented at 20/200 right eye, 20/400 
left which means I do have trouble seeing objects both near and far. However 
my visual acuity can't ever be accurately determined because of nystagmus, 
which is an involuntary eye movement that causes my eyes to move rapidly in 
a horizontal direction: side-to-side.

In terms of the tools I use, I get a lot done using many of the Firefox 
add-ons I helped develop like Big Buttons, Page Zoom and Font & Theme Size 
Changer (more on these later). Firefox itself is great because it is so 
customisable, meaning I can make it fit my needs so it is as comfortable for 
me to work with as possible.

There are a lot of free accessibility tools and default accessibility 
options I rely on like text-to-speech and magnifier applications. There are 
other more advanced tools out there but when you start to look beyond 
default accessibility features and free software, your options start to get 
very costly. I've never really understood why and I would love to see more 
affordable or free tools out there.


Q: When and how did you start coding?

A: I started coding in 2004. I know the basics of HTML, CSS, and some XUL 
(XML User Interface Language, Mozilla's XML-based language for building user 
interfaces of applications like Firefox). I'd like to learn JavaScript and 
I've started to do so, but the visual impairments can get in the way. Most 
of what I know, I've learned slowly, through teaching myself, experimenting 
and editing other's work.


Q: When did you get involved in helping to make Firefox more accessible?

A: Back in 2005, I downloaded Firefox and clicked on the "Get Involved" 
button, which was included as a default bookmark within the browser at the 
time. I soon started volunteering for Spread Firefox (a former website where 
enthusiasts helped promote Firefox) and eventually became an administrator 
on that site. Since 2011 when we retired that website, I've become involved 
in testing as part of Mozilla's quality assurance community, where I've 
handled testing for Firefox across all platforms - Windows, Mac, Linux and 
Android).

I've tried to help out wherever I can by testing and providing feedback for 
new projects too. One example is the early beginnings of the Mozilla 
WebMaker project (known as 'Mozilla Drumbeat' at the time). Webmaker is a 
fresh approach to teaching technology and digital literacy, the goal being 
to create a new generation of digital creators and webmakers.

I also spent some time as an Accessibility Steward, which saw me taking on 
the role of guiding and directing new and potential volunteers interested in 
contributing to Mozilla's accessibility goals. I'll be picking this 
responsibility up again soon as I start to help test Firefox OS devices and 
provide feedback from the perspective of a person with visual impairments.


Q: What is it that you like about Mozilla and Firefox?

A: I like that Mozilla fights for the rights of Internet users, especially 
the right to privacy on the web and user sovereignty; the idea that any data 
relating to an individual belongs to the individual.

What amazed me and really hit home when I first started volunteering was the 
sheer volume of like-minded people from all over the world who were coming 
together to work towards Mozilla's mission and goals; to keep the Web open 
and accessible to all. The community is very diverse; anyone can contribute, 
regardless of ability, income, education or background.


Q: How did Access Firefox come into being?

A: I co-founded AccessFirefox.org with Otto de Voogd when we were new to 
Firefox and the various accessibility options that came with it. At the 
time, the majority of information about these tools and features was spread 
across several websites, so we wanted to bring them under one roof. So we 
set about creating the project and the specific accessibility add-ons that 
come with it.

Over the years there have been several different contributors to Access 
Firefox from the Mozilla community. Some have written or contributed to the 
site's coding, some have created accessibility related add-ons, and many 
others have supported the site through advocacy.


Q: What are your favourite Firefox Accessibility add-ons?

A: Access Firefox accessibility add-ons are slightly different to standard 
Firefox add-ons. I briefly mentioned my favourites earlier, and I'm proud to 
have contributed to the development of all three of these: Theme Font & Size 
Changer, Page Zoom Button and Big Buttons.

Theme Font & Size Changer is a simple browser tool that lets people change 
the font size and type in Firefox. It is an especially valuable tool for 
visually impaired people and wide-screen users. It is different from add-ons 
that enlarge and reduce font size and type on web pages because it does so 
in all windows, menus and toolbars within Firefox itself. All font size and 
font family changes are instantly applied, saved permanently and maintained 
through sessions.

Page Zoom Button gives users control of all three page-zoom functions in 
Firefox from a single button. Users can click on or roll the mouse wheel 
over the button to zoom in, zoom out and reset a web page back to its 
default view. Users can also zoom in and out of local offline files such as 
photos, graphics, and various documents.

Big Buttons provides large and extra-large Firefox navigation toolbar 
buttons.


Q: How would you recommend accessibility users get started with Firefox?

A: I would recommend starting by taking a look at the features that Firefox 
offers its users and then download the browser. However, for more detailed 
information on accessibility add-ons we recommend you take a look at Access 
Firefox's beginners' guide. Then take your time getting familiar with what's 
possible. Once you've done that, invest some time in customising Firefox so 
that it is as comfortable to use as you need it to be.

Access Firefox: www.accessFirefox.org .

NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1021 .

[Section Two ends]


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Accessibility Discussion.

Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination for 
accessibility discussion. The "site critiques" section has helped hundreds 
of people improve their websites, with members offering friendly, no 
nonsense advice.

You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to 
guru. So whether you're looking to learn more about accessibility, want to 
help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to browse the 
archives, head over to:

http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


++Sponsored notice: Audio book mysteries to relax and enjoy

More and more people are using audio books to relax, and to develop and 
stimulate their imaginations. My name is Donna J. Jodhan and since 2010 I 
have been using my audio mysteries to help thousands from around the world 
to do just that - for pennies at a time.

I am an author who is blind. My audio mystery titles include 'Young, 
good-looking, and brilliant!' [plot summary follows]:
Who says that success does not come with a price tag? Especially when there 
are secrets lurking in the background, and this was Senator Christian 
Jansen's downfall. There was one who did not want the senator to run as 
president because he would be too difficult to handle. Another wanted the 
senator dead for breaking his promise to an oil company. And a Mafia boss 
who felt that the senator would be dangerous to them as president.
Who could have done it? [plot summary ends] Other titles include 'The 
Million Dollar Mansion', 'The Kidnapper's Kid' and many more.

Visit www.donnajodhan.com to learn more, subscribe to my monthly newsletter 
or buy the audio mysteries direct at:
www.donnajodhan.com/store.html .
[Sponsored notice ends]


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2014 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Associate Editor: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 168 ends.] 
