
E-Access Bulletin, November/December 2014: "Embedded outreach"; Eye gaze tech; Access to elections.
Dan Jellinek [dan@headstar.com]
Sent:	01 December 2014 09:16
To:	eaccess@headstar.com

++E-ACCESS BULLETIN

Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability

- ISSUE 173, November/December 2014.



A Headstar Publication.

http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the 
end).





++Issue 173 Contents.



01: "Embedded outreach" key to digital inclusion, conference hears

- Older and disabled people more receptive to trusted workers.



02: Low-cost eye gaze tech shortlisted for education award

- New options for pupils with complex needs.



03: Online resource to boost access to elections and politics

- International foundation aims to create "peer pressure".



News in Brief:

04: Future Inclusion - contract helps "hardest-to-reach" groups gain basic 
digital skills; 05: Innovation Reward - £400,000 disability tech 
competition; 06: Work Detail - portal to help US employers use accessible 
technology.



Section Two: Viewpoint - Web accessibility.

07: Embedding inclusion: Most organisations do not handle accessibility 
well - but the tools exist to take a low-cost, high reward approach, writes 
Jonathan Hassell in an exclusive extract from his new book "Including your 
missing 20%" by embedding web and mobile accessibility".



[Contents ends].





++Sponsored Notice: GeorgiePhone



The Android smartphone for people with all levels of sight loss.

GeorgiePhone is a family of Android smartphone apps that make using your 
phone and carrying out everyday tasks quick and easy for everyone.



GeorgiePhone's big bright buttons and words with colour choices make phoning 
and texting easy, and for those who can't see, everything can speak. Choose 
from:



- Apps to make bus and walking journeys less stressful, helping you find 
where you are, and what's around;

- Apps for surfing the web, enjoying  YouTube, setting calendar reminders, 
speaking the colour of your clothes; reading your mail

- And many more!



Download today from Google Play Store: just search on 'GeorgiePhone'.



[Sponsored Notice ends].





++Sponsored Notice: Traveleyes

- The World Travel Company With A Difference

- Anniversary Discount Offer For EAB Readers.



Traveleyes is a world travel company with a difference, providing hand-made, 
multi-sensory group holiday vacations for both blind and sighted travellers, 
who journey together to stunning world destinations.



April 2014 marks our 10-year anniversary. To celebrate this proud milestone, 
Traveleyes is giving sight back to those suffering from preventable 
blindness in some of the world's poorest countries. So far we have cured 
blindness in more than 120 people! We aim to reach 500 before April 2015.



By booking onto one of our exciting holidays, you too can help. What's more, 
as an introductory offer for E-Access Bulletin readers, we will give you a 
£50 voucher to use against the price of your holiday booking. For your 
voucher code, email us now at

info@Traveleyes-international.com



Terms and conditions apply.



[Sponsored Notice ends].





++Section One: News.



+01: "Embedded outreach" key to digital inclusion, conference hears



Digital inclusion projects must work with community and voluntary sector 
bodies if the UK is to ensure people with disabilities engage with the 
digital world, a national conference has heard.



The call was made by Jude Palmer, managing director of Digital Outreach, a 
social enterprise formed in 2007 by three organisations - Community Service 
Volunteers, Age UK and CEL Group - to run outreach work for the UK's digital 
TV switchover.



Research at the time from lead TV switchover body Digital UK found there was 
a group of about 20% of the population who would not naturally engage with a 
major mainstream publicity campaign, Palmer told delegates at November's 
digital inclusion conference hosted by non-profit Tinder Foundation.



These included older people, people with a disability and those for whom 
English is not their first language, all of whom can be socially isolated, 
she said.



"A lot of people found the switchover daunting, because TV for a lot of 
people is their main connection out into society", Palmer said. "They were 
putting their head in the sand, saying 'it's technical, it's not for me, why 
do I need to change? I'm perfectly OK as I am'. So a lot of this resonates 
with why people have not got online yet."



The key to developing a successful strategy to reaching people in these 
groups was to work with and through voluntary and community groups who are 
already interacting with and trusted by them, she said.



Palmer said the nature of "embedded outreach" was "about people hearing 
messages from the person they see every week, every day: finding that one 
person and that one organisation that they do trust and interact with.



"We often describe it as 'knitting' - we were able to knit organisations 
together so you can cut across geographical barriers, social groups. You 
need to ask - how can you develop relationships with local voluntary and 
community groups?"



Once the right groups have been found, it is important for digital inclusion 
groups to strike the right balance between passing them consistent materials 
to fit their own messages, and allowing the trusted intermediaries to remain 
in control, she said.



"It is about making sure you work consistently with every organisation so 
key messaging is cascaded down, and people are signposted consistently for 
where they can get further help.



But at the same time once you hand over the framework, [you must] leave it 
to the organisation to deliver that. What we find with embedded outreach is 
there needs to be an investment from those organisations as well, and that 
is a really big ask."



In the course of its work, Digital Outreach was asked to run a trial project 
in the North West of England to see how its embedded outreach model for 
digital TV might work for broader digital inclusion, and the results 
strongly supported the concept, Palmer said.



Overall, research found that some 77% of people reacted positively to online 
training if it was led by someone they knew, compared with only 17% reacting 
positively to a session led by someone they did not know.



NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1088 .





+02: Low-cost eye gaze tech shortlisted for education award



A low-cost eye gaze computer controller for schoolchildren is among 
technologies shortlisted for the 2015 Bett Awards for educational ICT (

http://www.bettawards.com ).

The shortlist was announced this month by i2i Events, organisers of the 
annual London Bett conference, with the British Educational Suppliers 
Association (BESA).



Inclusive EyeGaze Foundations combines myGaze eye tracker hardware from 
German firm Visual Interaction with Eye Gaze Attention & Looking software 
from accessible early learning software specialists Inclusive Technology. It 
is portable, and works with any Windows computer.



Students can learn to track, fix their gaze and interact with images on 
screen. The system also allows real-time recording of students' progress, so 
teachers can review where they looked and for how long using line trace, 
video and heat maps.



Sandra Thistlethwaite, specialist speech and language therapist at Inclusive 
Technology, told E-Access Bulletin the system's cost of just under £1,000 
was less than a tenth of the average previous cost of similar technologies, 
opening up new possibilities for eye gaze ICT in schools.



"Traditionally, devices have cost more than £10,000 so they have not been in 
the reaches of most schools, and you had to go through individual funding 
streams", Thistlethwaite said. "So we have been working hard to get units up 
at a reasonable price that can be afforded by a much wider range of schools 
and pupils.



"We had already identified those with a physical need for eye gaze but this 
is now giving us the insight into how we interact with and teach pupils with 
more profound and complex needs, where we are not sure about their cognitive 
skills, or what they can understand from what they see on screen."



It is possible that as much as 10%-20% of the UK special school population 
could experience some benefit from using eye-gaze technology, she said. "I 
was talking to a special school in the North East this morning with 120 
pupils which has 20 pupils now using eye gaze and possibly more in the 
pipeline."



Plans for future developments include more sophisticated learning analytics, 
with systems that can help users through a learning progression and return 
more detailed data on their work to teachers and therapists, Thistlethwaite 
said.



The seven other finalists in the Bett Awards special educational needs 
category are the Clicker Books literacy app for primary school children, 
from Crick Software; ReadingWise English literacy software from IdeasWise; 
the Dynamo Profiler online dyscalculia assessor from JellyJames Publishing; 
Forbrain, an auditory feedback headset for speech improvement, from Sound 
For Life; Read&Write literacy support software from Texthelp; Predictable, a 
text-based augmentative communication app, from Therapy Box; and Exam Pen, a 
scanner and assistive reader to help students with reading difficulties such 
as dyslexia take exams independently, from WizCom Tech.



Winners will be announced in January 2015.



NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1086 .





+03: Online resource to boost access to elections and politics



An online resource to boost access to elections and politics by people with 
disabilities is to be launched next month by the International Foundation 
For Electoral Systems (IFES), a non-profit based in Washington DC, E-Access 
Bulletin has learned.



IFES works internationally to promote access to democracy by all groups 
including people with disabilities, with funding largely from government 
agencies in the US, UK, Canada and Australia. Its work is aimed at many 
groups including governments, election management agencies, civil society 
groups, academics, lawyers, disability groups and people with disabilities.



The new online resource will be based on an overhaul of the foundation's 
website ElectionAccess.org (

www.electionaccess.org ),

IFES access and inclusion specialist Virginia Atkinson told E-Access 
Bulletin.



It will include an introduction to disability rights aimed at election 
management bodies and observer groups, giving examples of inclusive practice 
such as accessible voter education



"In many countries they don't think at all about access to elections for 
people for disabilities", Atkinson said. "Or maybe they build a wheelchair 
ramp, but they don't think about other issues such as accessible voter 
education, websites or voting machines."



Materials will include good practice examples such as YouTube videos, images 
or brochures and posters from other countries, as well as excerpts from 
relevant laws on election access.



"We are hoping the website will be used as an advocacy tool to create peer 
pressure, and help change discriminatory laws", she said. "It will be the 
only site where all this information is collected in one place."



Other aspects of the foundation's current disability rights work includes a 
major project in South East Asia working with international teams of 
election observers, Atkinson said. "Many observer teams do not include 
people with disabilities, and then don't include questions relating to 
disability access in their work", she said.



NOTE: Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1084 .





++News in Brief:



+04: Future Inclusion: A contract to help 200,000 people in the 
"hardest-to-reach" social groups in England, including disabled people, to 
gain basic digital skills has been awarded to Tinder Foundation. The "Future 
Digital Inclusion" programme will be run in 2014-15 through the established 
network of UK online centres in community locations such as libraries and 
voluntary groups, with funding from the Department for Business, Innovation 
and Skills. Learners will be supported through Tinder Foundation's learning 
platform, Learn My Way to gain web skills such as email, safety, job 
searching, and transacting. More than 750 "digital champion" volunteers will 
be trained to support delivery in local communities:



Short link: http://bit.ly/14NUQOp



Full link: 
http://www.tinderfoundation.org/our-thinking/news/tinder-foundation-wins-future-digital-inclusion-contract





+05: Innovation Reward: A £400,000 competition to inspire people to develop 
innovative technologies helping people with disabilities has been launched 
by the UK government with innovation charity Nesta. The Accessible 
Technology Prize money is to be distributed between two shortlists of 25 and 
then 10 ideas to help them develop, before the final winner is announced in 
2016 to receive a further £50,000:



Short link: http://bit.ly/1u2YtuY



Full link: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/entrepreneurs-encouraged-to-tap-into-creative-accessible-technologies-market





+06: Work Detail: A web portal to help US employers adopt and use accessible 
workplace technology has been launched by the Partnership on Employment and 
Accessible Technology (PEAT), a division of the US Office of Disability 
Employment Policy. PEATworks.org contains resources, tools and articles, 
including legal obligations and a step-by-step guide on implementing and 
testing a range of accessible technologies in the workplace:

http://www.peatworks.org/



[Section One ends].





++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription

- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.



When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues, customers and 
staff, call Adept.



Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille, BSL, Easy 
Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton, Moon and sub-titles, at 
prices from a penny a word.



Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme, public service 
leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:

- One-stop shop for all formats

- Products quality-checked by users

- Corporate presentation including your house style

- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands

- Multi-format discounts

- Accessible packaging



Contact us at:

Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)

Email transcription@adept-uk.org



[Sponsored Notice ends]





++Section Two: Viewpoint

- Web accessibility.



+07: Embedding inclusion

by Jonathan Hassell.



Most organizations are either oblivious to, or terrified about, web 
accessibility.



They are probably aware that up to 20% of their customers - people with 
disabilities - could be clicking away from their websites, or leaving their 
mobile apps every day without having bought anything or found the 
information or service they wished to find.



They may have even heard from one of this 20%, complaining about problems 
they can't reproduce, talking about 'assistive technologies' they don't 
understand, and asking for what seem like impossible fixes.



They know there is the possibility of being sued if they don't do the right 
thing, but they don't know how far they need to go to prevent that. So if 
they do make something 'accessible', it's usually only for one product, or 
one version of a product.



If this sounds anything like the place where you work, I have some 
comforting news: you are not alone.



I learned directly where I believe most organizations want to be from the 
heads of diversity and inclusion of the top blue-chip corporations in Europe 
at a meeting of the Vanguard Network in 2011. Here, the event's chairwoman 
spent a whole hour asking each of the delegates what one thing would really 
make a difference to their organization's inclusion practices, if they could 
achieve it. When delegates were asked to vote for which contribution they 
felt was the most important, the following was the unanimous choice: "What I 
want is to strategically embed inclusion into my organization's culture and 
business-as-usual processes, rather than just doing another inclusion 
project."



I spent much of my time subsequently conveying the following to the people 
in the room:



That they could implement a strategy that would allow them to attract and 
keep that 20% of their audience who are disabled, while not detracting from 
the user experience of those who aren't.



That there was a way they could sleep soundly, knowing that they'd done 
enough to cover their 'accessibility risk', but without costing the earth.



That, through following a simple, strategic business-aligned framework, they 
could embed the best practice necessary to consistently achieve these aims 
throughout their organization.



And that all of this work could also benefit their organization in their 
bottom line, as benchmarked analytics show how disabled people's increased 
use of their sites increases their turnover and profits.



What did I have that could take them from their position of pain to the 
place they all wanted to be? The answer is British Standard BS 8878:2010, 
Web Accessibility - Code of Practice.



It's not the catchiest title in the world, but BS 8878 opens up in detail 
the strategies, policies and processes that award-winning, best-of-breed 
organizations like the BBC, IBM, Vodafone, Opera, BT and Lloyds Banking 
Group have used to become 'accessibility competent and confident', so that 
they can be used by any organization, no matter how big or small.



It does this at a time when the legal imperatives behind accessibility are 
being strengthened internationally, and when tablet and smartphone vendors 
are racing to promote accessibility as a key selling point of their 
handsets. It also does this as we start to enter the massive demographic 
change that will result in the number of people who need accessibility 
rocketing up, and the 'missing 20%' become 50%.



There has never been a better time to get into web accessibility, and people 
who have implemented BS 8878 are increasingly telling me that incorporating 
its user-centred inclusive design thinking into their production processes 
has resulted in not only more accessible websites and apps for disabled 
people, but better websites and apps for everyone.



NOTE: Professor Jonathan Hassell has more than 14 years' experience of 
embedding accessibility within digital production teams in leading companies 
worldwide, and he wrote the British Standard BS 8878. This article is based 
on an edited extract of his new book "Including your missing 20% by 
embedding web and mobile accessibility", reproduced with permission from 
BSI.



For more information on the book and to access free accompanying case-study 
videos, visit: http://hassellinclusion.com/book/



British Standards can be obtained in PDF or hard copy formats from: 
www.bsigroup.com/Shop or by contacting BSI Customer Services on 020 8996 
9001 or email: cservices@bsigroup.com



Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:

http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=1081 .



[Section Two ends].





++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum

- Accessibility Discussion.



Established in 2003, Accessify Forum is a popular destination for 
accessibility discussion. The "site critiques" section has helped hundreds 
of people improve their websites, with members offering friendly, no 
nonsense advice.



You'll find discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to 
guru. So whether you're looking to learn more about accessibility, want to 
help others and improve on your own knowledge, or just to browse the 
archives, head over to:



http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .



[Special notice ends].





++Sponsored notice: Author Donna Jodhan announces release of "12 days of 
Christmas" box set



More and more people are using audio books to relax, and stimulate their 
imaginations. My name is Donna Jodhan and since 2010 I have been using my 
audio mysteries to help thousands from around the world to do just that - 
for pennies at a time.



My new 12-episode Christmas series is filled with riveting Christmas 
mysteries for all ages. Recorded in my own voice and in my own unique style, 
let me help capture the true spirit of Christmas!



Download a free sample, available in the third week of November at:

http://www.donnajodhan.com/store.html.


[Sponsored notice ends]





++End Notes.



+How to Receive the Bulletin.



To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email

eab-subs@headstar.com

with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in 
the subject header.



Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:

dan@headstar.com .



Copyright 2014 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .

The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included, and as long as people are always encouraged to 
subscribe with us individually by email. Please also inform the editor when 
you are reproducing our content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:

http://www.headstar.com/eab

is also cited.



+Personnel:

Editor: Dan Jellinek.

Associate Editor: Tristan Parker.

Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.



ISSN 1476-6337.



[Issue 173 ends.]

 
 
	

 	Previous Item	Next Item	
Connected to Microsoft Exchange
