***************************************
*
E-ACCESS BULLETIN

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.

http://www.e-accessibility.com

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the 
Blind
http://www.rnib.org.uk
the National Library for the Blind
http://www.nlbuk.org
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
http://www.gdba.org.uk

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing eab-subs@headstar.com
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!
**************************************

ISSUE 8, 2000

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News:
- Rotating wheel Braille display could slash 
costs; Digital radio station spreads the word; 
Vodafone launches package for blind users; 
Dolphin dives into the net; WAI comes to 
Bristol; CAST forms alliance with Webable.

Section Two: Democracy
- Voting technology

Section Three: Focus
- Voice recognition

Section Four: Accessible gaming
- Educational games


************************************
SECTION ONE: NEWS
************************************

ROTATING WHEEL BRAILLE DISPLAY 
COULD SLASH COSTS

A new form of refreshable Braille display for 
computers and other digital devices, in which 
characters are moved under the user's static 
finger – in contrast with current displays which 
are read with a moving finger - is about to be 
tested by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology in the US.

The Rotating-Wheel Based Braille display uses a 
system of small rods rising and falling, just as in 
current refreshable displays. But because the 
rods are beneath a rotating wheel a few inches in 
diameter, far fewer are needed to create what 
appears to be a long line of text.

The institute say its new machines should 
therefore be far cheaper than existing refreshable 
displays – in the region of 1,000 US Dollars, 
compared with current prices of around 10,000 
Dollars – and more reliable as well.

Tests have shown that people reading Braille can 
quickly adapt to moving displays. However, for 
those who prefer to stick with stationary text, 
NIST is also working on two variations of the 
new system: one where the wheel stops and 
starts to create a series of stationary displays, and 
one where the display is in a line with a moving 
'write head' underneath. Both could still be 
significantly cheaper and more reliable than 
existing systems.

NIST hopes to have a fully functioning prototype 
of the wheel working at its third annual 
electronic book workshop in Washington DC 
from September 25-27. 'Electronic Book 2000: 
Changing the Fundamentals of Reading' will 
examine e-book applications for libraries, 
education and government; digital rights 
management; and e-book standards and 
interoperability.

The conference web site is at:
http://www.itl.nist.gov/div895/ebook2000/

And for more information on the rotating wheel 
device see:
http://www.nist.gov/itl/div895/isis/projects/Braill
e/


DIGITAL RADIO STATION SPREADS THE 
WORD

A new digital radio station devoted to the spoken 
word can now be received over the Internet as 
well as through the Sky Digital network (channel 
942) and the Digital One Network. There are 
also plans to add alternative platforms including 
digital cable, digital satellite and mobile phone 
transmission.

'Oneword' is the first national radio station 
dedicated to the transmission of plays, books, 
comedy and reviews. It broadcasts from 6am to 
midnight, covering a wide range of genres from 
classic fiction to comedy and popular writing. 
Current programming includes The 
Autobiography by John Major; The Inimitable 
Jeeves by PG Wodehouse; Last Orders by 
Graham Swift; Silas Marner by George Eliot; 
and Crisis Four by Andy McNab. Most books 
are read out unabridged, in a series of episodes.

The company's shareholders are The Guardian 
Media Group, Unique Broadcasting, audio 
publishers Chivers Communications, and audio 
book producers Heavy Entertainment.

The station's services are not specifically 
targeted at blind and visually impaired listeners, 
but it is keen to reach that audience. There are 
currently some problems with the accessibility of 
digital radio sets, not least their cost, but as 
prices fall and digital radio and other services 
become more accessible to blind users, the 
station could prove a flexible and enjoyable 
alternative to talking books.

Paul Kent, head of programmes at Oneword, 
says the service is set to become more accessible 
with greater 'signposting' of programmes on the 
channel itself, ensuring listeners are kept abreast 
of programmes due to appear later in the day or 
in the next few days.

The basic time slots are currently 15 minutes 
around peak times and 30 minutes at quieter 
times of the day or evening when people have 
more time to listen. There are even a few one 
hour slots. The station is a commercial enterprise 
and hence does carry advertising between and 
during programmes, although Kent says efforts 
are made to introduce the ads at natural breaks in 
the story to minimise disruption.

The station's web site is at:
http://www.oneword.co.uk/


VODAFONE LAUNCHES PACKAGE FOR 
BLIND USERS

Mobile phone company Vodafone has launched 
a new package specially designed for people who 
are blind or visually impaired. Developed in 
conjunction with the Queen Alexandra College 
in Birmingham, the package includes the Nokia 
5110 phone at 9.99 UK Pounds, a choice of 
several tariffs and the normal monthly line 
rental.

The Nokia 5110 was chosen because it features 
large keys in varying shapes and brightly-
coloured clip-on covers for easy identification by 
people who are partially sighted. It has a large 
back-lit screen for optimum visibility.

The package includes access to all Vodafone 
correspondence – including bills - in Braille or 
large print or on tape. All literature relating to 
the package, information sent with monthly bills 
and new product and special offer information 
will also be sent to customers in these formats.

For details call 0800 10 11 12 or fax 01295 
815668, quoting 'Queen Alexandra College 
offer'.


DOLPHIN DIVES INTO THE NET

Dolphin Computer Access, the leading developer 
of screen magnification, speech and Braille 
software, is to launch an Internet Service 
Provider aimed at blind and visually impaired 
computer users.

'Dolphinaccess.net' will be a low-cost service 
combining Internet access, free email accounts 
and web space with web content provision. The 
only charge will be that of a dial-up call rate, 
which will be kept to a minimum using the best 
telecommunications deal that can be struck, the 
company says. Dolphin is not intending to make 
a profit from the service, but simply to build a 
community of users.

"With an ordinary free ISP you may pick up a 
CD-ROM from your supermarket or wherever to 
install the software, but it is often very graphical 
and not accessible to a keyboard in any way", a 
spokeswoman for the company said. "Our 
installation software will all be accessible, and 
we will also feature content including links to 
sites of interest to blind and visually impaired 
computer users."

The service is due to be launched in the UK in 
the autumn and to other countries including 
Ireland, Scandinavia, Holland, Australia and the 
US by the end of the year. For more information 
call 01905 754577 or visit 
http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk


WAI COMES TO BRISTOL

The Web Accessibility Initiative of the World 
Wide Web Consortium 
(http://www.w3c.org/wai) is to hold a series of 
three working group meetings at the Hewlett-
Packard Laboratories in Bristol in the first week 
of October 2000.

The meetings include a workshop on web device 
independent authoring on 3-4 October 
(http://www.w3.org/2000/07/diw) which will 
examine what accessibility guidelines should 
exist for content that will span multiple 
platforms such as web, digital television and 
mobile phones. The other two meetings will 
cover web content accessibility and web 
authoring tool accessibility.


CAST FORMS ALLIANCE WITH WEBABLE

CAST, the non-profit Centre for Applied Special 
Technologies and creator of the industry 
standard BOBBY free accessibility testing 
software, has announced a partnership with 
accessibility consultancy WebABLE.

Under the alliance WebABLE has become the 
centre's 'preferred agent' for corporate web site 
accessibility reviews, based around the BOBBY 
test.

Meanwhile WebABLE's chief technology 
officer Mike Paciello has written a new book, 
"Web Accessibility for People with Disabilities", 
which includes tips and techniques on improving 
site accessibility. The book has a US focus, 
particularly on the legal side. It will be available 
by September 15, 2000 but can be ordered now 
from major online bookshops.

[Section one ends]


SECTION TWO: DEMOCRACY
- VOTING TECHNOLOGY

FREE AND FAIR? UNNOTICED 
DEFICIENCIES OF THE ELECTORAL 
PROCESS

The recent elections in Zimbabwe gripped the 
world's attention with their explosive mix of 
politics and racial tension. But while coverage 
was largely focused on whether the vote was fair 
and free from violence, any particular difficulties 
that disabled people may have had in casting 
their votes went largely unnoticed.

There is some evidence, however, that people 
with sight loss were seriously disadvantaged by 
the organisation of the poll. According to the 
Dorothy Duncan Braille Library and 
Transcription Service in Zimbabwe, one boy of 
voting age was told that only an election official 
could mark his ballot paper, and he left without 
knowing whether his vote was cast the way he 
requested. Another blind person tried to make 
sure the official marked her ballot paper as she 
requested by shouting out her choice so everyone 
in the room could hear.

These tales highlight some of the problems faced 
by disabled voters generally, and people with 
sight loss in particular, in elections all over the 
world. Can officials be trusted to cast the vote as 
requested? Can people cast their vote at all?

The UK is certainly not exempt from these 
worries, although there are technological 
developments in the offing which may make it 
easier for the visually impaired to vote fairly and 
securely.

Last year, the Home Office Working Party on 
Electoral Procedures produced its long-awaited 
final report 
(http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/ccpd/eleclink.ht
m). In it the group made a number of 
recommendations to improve access to elections 
for disabled people including that large print 
posters of the ballot paper should be displayed 
and ballot paper templates or polling aids 
provided in polling stations.

It also recommended that national minimum 
access standards should be introduced to assist 
local authorities, returning officers and presiding 
officers in identifying and setting up accessible 
polling stations, although it saw no need for the 
standards to be made mandatory as it claimed 
accessibility issues are adequately covered under 
existing legislation. Finally, it recommended that 
the Home Office should issue new guidance to 
electoral administrators on all aspects of disabled 
access to electoral services.

Many of these recommendations became law this 
year when Parliament passed the Representation 
of the People Act 2000. Among a number of 
regulations designed to improve access for 
disabled people was that polling stations should 
have a 'device' to help the partially sighted vote 
without any need of assistance from the 
presiding officer.

What is a device? The Electoral Reform Society 
(http://www.electoral-reform.org.uk), which has 
condemned access arrangements for disabled 
people in the past, says the term could simply 
mean magnifiers that can be used to view ballot 
forms. "Even so, that is quite a big step given the 
terrible situation in which disabled people have 
found themselves in the UK," says the society's 
Press and Campaigns Officer Alex Folkes.

The new legislation also paved the way for a 
range of pilot schemes for new electoral 
procedures. The intention was that innovative 
new technologies could be tested in local 
elections with a view to applying them to 
national parliamentary elections at a later stage.

These pilot schemes have included all-postal 
ballots, mobile ballot boxes and extended voting 
hours. More significantly however, several areas 
have tested electronic voting procedures, 
allowing people to cast their votes over the 
Internet or using touchscreen computers in 
polling stations.

Evaluation reports on each of these pilot schemes 
can be found at:
http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/ccpd/cnu/evalcon
t.htm

Meanwhile the Improvement and Development 
Agency for Local Government 
(http://www.idea.gov.uk) is currently developing 
a national electronic register of voters 
(http://www.idea-infoage.gov.uk/er3.htm), which 
may act as the precursor to electronic voting in 
national elections. This in turn could be a more 
secure and accessible means of voting for blind 
and visually impaired people as well as those 
with other disabilities.

Even if electronic voting from people's homes 
does not become a reality for some time, 
touchscreen voting in polling stations holds great 
potential for people with sight loss. It may be 
possible to magnify the images on screen, for 
example, to make participation easier.

However, while the Electoral Reform Society 
says electronic voting may indeed improve 
accessibility, it says a range of problems have to 
be solved first, and it has established a 
commission to examine the issue more closely.

"Electronic voting has the potential to improve 
access for people with disabilities but hacking 
has the potential to throw the whole system into 
chaos and this issue needs serious 
consideration," says Folkes. Of even more 
concern to the society is equality of access. 
"Only around 10% of the population are online 
which is a very small minority," Folkes says.

[Section two ends]


SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- VOICE RECOGNITION

LOOK, NO HANDS – INNIT?

This summer, IBM announced the release of a 
string of new voice recognition products 
designed to improve access to the internet by 
speech alone. From the hype surrounding the 
launch of these products - including the 
WebSphere Voice Server and Embedded 
ViaVoice - you would be forgiven for thinking 
they would usher in a period of truly hands free 
computing.

IBM has described voice and multi-modal access 
to information as the 'natural interfaces', and 
would seem to be a boon for blind and visually 
impaired technology users. But as we reported in 
our last issue (E-Access Bulletin July 2000), the 
situation is not that clear-cut.

Technology consultant Nuala Davis of 
AbilityNet (http://www.abilitynet.co.uk) says: 
"While you may soon be able to check stock 
prices and football scores over the internet using 
your voice alone, the leap to hands-free home 
computing is still some way off for the vast 
majority of people. Generally, we would advise 
people to have a basic understanding of 
computers and to have used a screen reader 
before they attempt to use any voice recognition 
software."

Davis says AbilityNet frequently hears from 
people who have unrealistic expectations for 
voice recognition in computing, many of them 
well-meaning relatives making enquiries on 
behalf of relatives who have recently lost their 
sight and want access to the internet.

"As long as we take the time to explain why 
being familiar with computing is essential, then 
most people understand," says Davis. "Even 
sighted people using voice recognition for the 
first time need a lot of training."

For example, you can't simply say to a 
computer, 'send an e-mail to my Dad', and have 
it do the rest, she said. Only voice commands 
that correspond to existing menu or keyboard 
commands can be used.

Many who have not used a word processor 
before will not know what the term 'bold' means, 
so coping with an error message would certainly 
cause problems. Simple but essential commands 
such as those used to files or 'Save as' in word 
processing packages like Word are another 
source of potential difficulty. And even using the 
best voice recognition applications currently 
available, computer users still need to be familiar 
with basics such as drop-down menus, check 
boxes and help dialogue boxes.

Voice recognition also has its limitations for 
those already used to keyboards. Software can 
misinterpret a pause during dictation, and users 
can then find it a struggle to return to the file 
they were working on.

Clive Bradbury of T & T Consultancy 
(http://www.tandt-consultancy.co.uk), a supplier 
of voice recognition software for people with 
disabilities, says that while some packages are 
very powerful, it is the human input which 
causes most frustration.

He cites the case of one user to highlight how 
different regional accents can also lead to 
mistakes: a Geordie was using voice recognition 
at work, and needed to refer to industrial crane 
'loads', but because of the person's accent the 
computer consistently misinterpreted the 'load' 
as 'lord'. And the simple phrase "isn't it?" can 
be a source of frequent dictation error as it is 
spoken in so many different ways by different 
people - innit?

Bradbury agrees that it is much better if users 
come to voice recognition with some keyboard 
skills. "You do need some PC skills, but you 
don't need to be a PC expert," he says.

According to T And T, the best package 
available is 'NaturallySpeaking' from Dragon 
systems (http://www.dragonsys.com). People 
with visual impairment can use the software 
alongside the widely-used JAWS screen-reader 
from Henter-Joyce (http://www.hj.com), 
although a further piece of software – JawBone – 
is required to enable the two packages to work 
together.

This means the combined solution is not cheap – 
with JAWS retailing at around 500 UK Pounds 
(plus the cost of a voice synthesiser), 
NaturallySpeaking Professional Version 
(required for use with JawBone) costing around 
450 Pounds and JawBone a further 400 Pounds, 
the whole lot will cost around 1,350 Pounds plus 
VAT.

Naturally Speaking can be used to manipulate 
most text-based computer applications including 
email and Internet access software. It comes with 
a 10,000 word vocabulary and has the ability to 
place words in context, which means that where 
it is unsure about a word that has been dictated, 
it will look for a similar phrase where that was 
previously used. Users can also train the 
software to recognise any individual word 
precisely as they pronounce it, in an attempt to 
solve problems with accents.

Bradbury says most people adapt to dictation 
fairly quickly. Reports and more formal 
correspondence are usually composed first as 
users become familiar with dictation, and with 
practice users can format text, move the cursor 
and operate Naturally Speaking using their voice 
and only a few key stroke commands.

[Section three ends]


SECTION FOUR: ACCESSIBLE GAMING
- EDUCATIONAL GAMES

TEACHERS AND PUPILS FALL INTO GAP 
IN THE MARKET

You can run for President of the US, journey to 
Mars or quest for Excalibur: as our recent series 
of articles on accessible computer gaming has 
shown, over the past couple of years a great 
variety of games have become available for 
people who are partially sighted or blind.

There is a surprising gap in this diversity, 
however: very few of these games are designed 
specifically for children, and even fewer are 
educational. In the UK, specialists in education 
for the visually impaired have found there is a 
wealth of useful software for children with 
learning difficulties, but almost no choice for 
children who are blind or have severe sight loss.

While there is no strict definition of an 
educational game, and many games could be 
argued to have educational elements, games with 
a strong focus on teaching are all but non-
existent in this country.

"I can't think of one game that is advertised 
specifically for blind children", says Fiona 
Balfour, computer teacher at the Royal Blind 
School in Edinburgh. "Almost all games depend 
on the user having at least some vision."

Balfour says many attempts to adapt games for 
children at the school have proved frustrating. 
While changes to keyboards and screen 
magnification can improve accessibility, they 
can also make the game itself too challenging. 
Since a large proportion of her pupils have 
learning difficulties and sight loss, some adapted 
games remain inaccessible even though they are, 
in theory, playable.

Even so, she has had some success. The 
'Thinking Things' series of games from Edmark 
(http://www.edmark.com) can be adapted for the 
visually impaired, as can a number of others 
available from the UK based R-E-M who 
specialise in educational software (http://www.r-
e-m.co.uk) and usefully have a quick reference 
table on their website which lists different 
software and games packages according to their 
suitability for different special needs groups.

Balfour says the most useful resource would be 
an adventure game for blind pupils which would 
stimulate problem solving skills. "I don't see 
why some sighted adventure games can't easily 
be adapted in this way, as giving children the 
ability to make choices in these adventures 
would be really interesting," she says.

The lack of educational software for the visually 
impaired appears to be a global problem: even in 
the US, where blind gaming has many devotees, 
there appear to be very few examples. However, 
there may be some cause for optimism about the 
future. In the course of its research for this 
article, E-Access Bulletin found that although 
there are very few products currently available, 
there are signs that some specialist companies in 
the US are beginning to focus their efforts on 
younger computer users.

PCSGames (http://www.pcsgames.com) is 
operated and maintained by blind programmers 
and their products are fully accessible to blind 
computer users. The company offers two 
educational games for children, A2Z Key Finder 
and Mobius Mountain.

A2Z Key Finder is designed to teach early 
keyboard skills to toddlers aged between two and 
four. The game can be set to play a letter, 
number and a corresponding sound, and it also 
has a 'Follow the Leader' function which invites 
children to follow prompts.

Mobius Mountain is a maths adventure game 
which follows the format of the snakes and 
ladders board game, but instead of rolling dice 
for their turn, players must solve mathematical 
problems. The game has a series of difficulty 
levels, making it suitable for children from four 
to eight years old.

Both games are both Windows and DOS 
compatible, and no special adaptive equipment is 
necessary to play them.

The American Printing House for the Blind 
(http://www.aph.org), established in 1858 and 
claiming to be the world's largest company 
devoted to the visually impaired, has developed 
two games for blind or visually impaired 
children, Math Flash and Talking Typer. 

Math Flash is mathematics tutor for 
schoolchildren which allows users to control the 
difficulty of the problems set, with the added 
flexibility for teachers to add problems into the 
exercises. Talking Typer for Windows is a 
typing tutor which instructs through lessons, 
practice and games. The game speaks a series of 
letters or words and waits for students to type, 
and can be used in a network. Both these games 
are for those aged six and over and require no 
special access software.

In all, though, these few US examples show how 
far there is to go, particularly in the UK, before 
blind and visually impaired schoolchildren and 
their teachers have a decent choice of 
computerised learning tools. We await 
developments with interest.

[Section four ends]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin,
e-mail eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe 
eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in 
the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to 
sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' 
in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to
Dan Jellinek at: dan@headstar.com


Published by Headstar Ltd
http://www.headstar.com
Copyright 2000 Headstar Ltd

The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long 
as all parts including this copyright notice are 
included. Sections of the report may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-
access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', 
and our web site address http://www.e-
accessibility.com is also cited.

[Issue ends]

