E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute 
for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind 
Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts]

ISSUE 12, DECEMBER 2000.

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News.
- 'Internet-ready car' is accessibility spin-
off; Certification for access technology 
trainers; Grabbing web pages over the 
phone; Calling all UpStarts; Braille Voyager 
breaks new ground; Microsoft and Pulse 
Data collaborate.

Section Two: Conference Report
- Techshare.

Section Three: Case Study
- 'LOOK'.

Section Four: Online Learning
- The 'JOB' Project.

[Contents ends.]


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

'INTERNET-READY CAR' IS 
ACCESSIBILITY SPIN-OFF.

Text-to-speech technology developed to help 
blind people access the Internet is behind an 
innovative new device for sighted people - 
an 'Internet-ready car' that allows drivers to 
access the net. The move highlights what 
advocates of inclusive design have been 
saying for years – that simple, accessible 
technology benefits everyone, not just 
people with visual or other impairments.

The prototype 'Bunnymobile' has been 
developed by web usability specialists 
Bunnyfoot. It is a 1999 Volkswagen New 
Beetle convertible, fitted with a notebook 
computer and a GSM mobile phone. An 
Internet connection is made using software 
developed by Bunnyfoot to emulate the main 
types of speech browser already used by 
blind people to surf the Internet.

The result allows drivers to listen to 
information online while keeping their eyes 
on the road. Dr Jon Dodd, Technical 
Director at Bunnyfoot said: "When web sites 
are designed to be usable by blind people 
they also work in 'eyes busy' situations, 
such as driving a car. We found that web 
sites which have been designed following 
accessible web design guidelines worked 
really well in our web-enabled car, but sites 
which did not follow these guidelines could 
not be heard."

Julie Howell, RNIB's Accessible Internet 
Campaigns Officer, was one of the first 
people to go for a spin in the Bunnymobile. 
"When Bunnyfoot contacted me, I wondered 
how technology used by blind people would 
help people driving cars! But I was able to 
hear gardening tips from Bob Flowerdew on 
the BBC Online site and listened to the latest 
financial news on ft.com without taking my 
eyes off the road. I could even pick up my 
email."

For more information visit:
http://www.bunnyfoot.com/


CERTIFICATION FOR ACCESS 
TECHNOLOGY TRAINERS.

A new certification scheme for people who 
train others to use access technology is to be 
piloted in January by the British Computer 
Association of the Blind (BCAB).

Steve Plumpton of BCAB told the RNIB's 
'Techshare' technology access conference 
earlier this month that the association has 
received many calls from people 
complaining about access technology advice 
and training.

The BCAB Trainer Certification Scheme is 
an attempt to raise standards in this area 
using a three-part test for trainers comprised 
of a delivery skills refresher course lasting 3-
5 days; written coursework; and a product 
competency test. Separate tests will have to 
be passed for each piece of access 
technology for which the trainer wishes to be 
certified.

As products are updated, new courses and 
certificates will be created, Plumpton said. It 
is also important that the scheme is 
promoted not only to the trainers but to the 
customers themselves, he said, so they are 
aware that there is a required standard for 
their training. 

A second pilot will be run in March, and it is 
hoped that the course will go live around 
Easter time. Further information about the 
scheme will appear in January at the BCAB 
web site:
http://www.bcab.org.uk/

* See also Techshare conference report, 
Section Two, this issue.


GRABBING WEB PAGES OVER THE 
PHONE.

The UK's first comprehensive phone-
activated voice internet service, 
BrowseByPhone, was launched this month 
by UK-based wireless Internet specialists 
Waperture (http://www.waperture.com).

BrowseByPhone allows telephone users to 
access Internet content by voice and a 
telephone keypad. The launch service – 
called GataGrab - lets people use the 
BrowseByPhone website to tell the system 
which pages on the web they are interested 
in. At any time thereafter they can dial an 
access number, key in a 'grab code', and 
hear the page they are interested in being 
read back to them, live off the Internet.

Waperture says it is keen to investigate 
further applications for the visually 
impaired. Once the service is established in 
the UK, the company wants to expand into 
the US and Europe, and plans to release a 
number of different voice services including 
conventional portal services such as sports, 
news and weather, and the ability for users 
to build their own voice sites and services.

The service uses 'SpeecHTML' technology 
from Vocalis. Many UK Internet Service 
Providers already use Vocalis 'SpeechMail' 
technology (http://www.speechmail.co.uk) 
to allow people to listen to their email 
messages, reply and delete them using 
spoken messages over the phone (see E-
Access Bulletin, May 2000).

The BrowseByPhone service can be 
accessed via the Internet from 
http://www.wapgata.com or 
http://www.browsebyphone.com

However, when E-Access Bulletin tried to 
test it some gremlins were evident. Dialling 
the test number produced the message: 
'Welcome to GataGrab at BrowseByPhone. 
Please enter the Grab Code for the page you 
want to access or press zero for the main 
browse portal'. When a zero was keyed, the 
same message was played, ad infinitum.


CALLING ALL UPSTARTS.

Budding social entrepreneurs are being 
invited to bid for a pot of 50,000 UK Pounds 
to help launch up to three projects designed 
to help a local community, in the first 
'UpStart Awards'.

The awards are being hosted by New 
Statesman magazine, with sponsorship from 
Centrica plc and further input from UNLTD, 
the first UK foundation for social 
entrepreneurs (http://www.unltd.org.uk).

Those accepting an award must be prepared 
to commit to their project full-time. The 
entry period runs to May 2001, and details 
can be found at the BOBBY-compliant 
UpStart web site:
http://www.upstarts.org.uk

The site will also act as an ongoing 
information resource for social 
entrepreneurs.


BRAILLE VOYAGER BREAKS NEW 
GROUND.

A new refreshable Braille computer display 
from German group Tieman claims to 
innovate in a number of ways.

It is extremely lightweight (1.2 kg), and 
connects to a computer via the USB 
(Universal Serial Bus) port, from which it 
also takes its power. Low power Braille cells 
use just 5 per cent of a laptop computer's 
battery output.

The display can also be used to pass 
commands back to the computer, controlling 
mainstream software applications over the 
Braille display. A further piece of 'Tiemans 
Express' software allows the construction of 
sequences of commands, or 'macros', that 
can be run with a single keystroke.

The Braille Voyager's UK distributor is 
Concept Systems. See:
http://www.conceptsystems.net/


MICROSOFT AND PULSEDATA 
COLLABORATE.

Microsoft and Pulse Data International have 
announced their collaboration to develop an 
e-book reader for the blind and visually 
impaired.

Microsoft Reader software will be integrated 
with Pulse Data's BrailleNote family of 
screenless personal data assistants that offer 
feedback through speech and electronic 
Braille (http://www.braillenote.com/).

To read an electronic book with BrailleNote, 
users will need to download an e-Book title 
from an online distributor to their 
BrailleNote device, then open the file. They 
will have the option to listen to the speech 
version of the e-Book or read the electronic 
Braille display.

Pulse Data's web site is at:
http://www.pulsedata.com/

[Section One ends]

SECTION TWO: CONFERENCE REPORT
- TECHSHARE.

TALKING BOOKS SET TO ENTER THE 
MAINSTREAM.

Talking books are about to enter the 
mainstream, delegates heard at the RNIB's 
recent 'Techshare' conference on how 
technology can help blind and partially 
sighted people in everyday situations like 
shopping, banking and in the workplace.

Peter Osborne, UK Network and 
International Development Manager at the 
RNIB, said the new 'Open eBook' standard 
for digital talking books 
(http://www.openebook.org) includes 
accessible multimedia data (see also E-
Access Bulletin, July and September issues).

This standard has grown out of various 
others including the DAISY standard. There 
are various portable hardware readers that 
are available to read this data.

Digital books are faster and cheaper to 
access than printed material. They are also 
searchable, portable and include active 
information by using hyperlinks.

John Worsfold of Dolphin Computer Access 
said it was important that a single standard 
should emerge for eBooks, and he hoped 
Open eBook would become that standard, 
since it has already been adopted for current 
or future use by more than 150 publishers.

He said eBook users could not only access 
the content they want but even add 
information such as audio or text notes. 
Another key feature of eBooks is that the 
voice that reads it is not a synthesised voice, 
Worsfold said.

But there are some potential problems that 
can be identified as well. These include 
copyright protection, file format issues, 
accessibility, usability and a problem with 
small screens on some hand-held devices.

There are tools available to create eBooks 
from various formats. For example, 'TIPS' 
software can take analogue recordings and 
create a structured eBook; 'WIPS' can 
change digital WAV files into an eBook; and 
'TOPS' can change eBooks into analogue 
recordings.

This variety means there will become a 
blurring between media and users will be 
able to get precisely what they want through 
mainstream publishers, Worsfold said. 

The conference also heard of a similar 
flexibility in publishing media which can 
arise from the use of the 'meta-language' 
XML (Extensible Markup Language).

Dave Pawson, Business Process 
Improvement Facilitator at the RNIB, said 
XML is a way of describing document or 
application content so it can be used across a 
range of delivery platforms like the web, 
mobile telephony and digital TV. XML can 
include digital signature information so the 
user can be sure the information is secure 
and is from the right source.

Pawson said that in the RNIB's Technical 
Consumer Services Division there are 
currently 10 magazines being produced in 
five media. So it seemed sensible to create 
them in XML, and then use transformation 
tools to export them into the other formats.

This process was tested initially using the 
departmental monthly briefing that goes out 
as Braille, HTML and print. The trials have 
been useful, although a few problems 
remain, namely: XML has a steeper learning 
curve than HTML; Word 2000 does not 
export good XML; and approximately 5% 
intervention is still needed to complete a 
document in a specific new format after 
exporting it from XML.

Also on the agenda at Techshare was how 
technology is assisting blind and partially 
sighted people to travel within and use the 
built environment.

A number of projects within the RNIB's 
Joint Mobility Unit have combined design 
advice and the introduction of assistive 
technology to help blind and partially 
sighted people. Projects have combined the 
use of colour contrast, good design practice 
and tactile, audible and visual signage.

Gill Whitney, Principal Researcher at the 
RNIB's Join Mobility Unit, spoke about 
way-finding aids – remotely-triggered 
speaking signs - for those people who cannot 
use a cane or a guide dog. There are 
currently two main types of these aids, RNIB 
React and Infravoice. 

RNIB React is a wall-mounted unit triggered 
by a credit-card sized radio transmitter or 
'module'. It can detect ambient noise and 
increase the sound level when required to 
combat it, for example when a train comes 
into a platform.

It is possible to input up to eight different 
messages into the unit, and these can be in 
different languages as well. After 
installation, the messages and configuration 
of the unit can be modified by plugging a 
laptop computer into it.

RNIB React units cost £1,300 each, and the 
modules cost £25, although the latter are 
usually distributed free of charge or loaned 
out. Some shops purchase their own units, so 
users are aware of the entrance to their shop. 
The system has been installed in Leeds City 
Centre and Golders Green High Street and 
Bus Station in London.

The Infravoice system operates by 
transmitting an infrared signal. It is a unit 
that has infrared beams pointed in four 
directions. This can be stand-mounted or 
mounted in a dome-shaped unit on the 
ceiling, looking rather like a CCTV unit. Its 
configuration can be changed in much the 
same way as the React system, using a 
laptop.

The Infravoice unit costs £690 and the 
receiver £230. Units have been installed in 
various shopping centres including 
Kingfisher, Bluewater, Cribbs Causeway, 
Touchwood and Chimes, and the receivers 
are loaned out through shopmobility.

* Report by Sally Cain, Technology 
Information Officer, RNIB. In our next 
issue, we will carry a further in-depth report 
from the Techshare Conference on issues 
surrounding access to technology by 
deafblind people.

[Section two ends]


SECTION THREE: CASE STUDY
- 'LOOK'.

YOUNG PEOPLE AT THE HEART OF 
FAMILY SUPPORT.

The National Federation of Families with 
Visually Impaired Children, more usually 
known under its snappier title of 'LOOK', is 
placing the web at the heart of its family 
support activities following the success of its 
first, volunteer-built site.

LOOK provides information and support to 
families with visually impaired children. It 
already has 35 regional support groups in the 
UK, but intends to set up many more to 
achieve its aim of better support and 
awareness for affected families nationwide.

The centre of the organisation helps the 
regional groups fund-raise and train 
volunteers, as well as providing legal advice 
through a network of links to top education 
lawyers. The charity links newcomers to 
other families with similar problems, and 
also helps set up Specific Eye Disorder 
groups.

The LOOK web site was initially created in 
March 2000. At first it consisted merely of 
an online version of its quarterly newsletter, 
as an experiment to see if a full-blown site 
would be well received.

Then along came Gareth Wait, a volunteer 
with two partially sighted children, both of 
whom have been helped by LOOK. By way 
of thanks, he offered to use his Internet skills 
to design and build a fully accessible site, 
and he is now the organisation's webmaster.

"Before he made contact with us, Gareth had 
had some rather dire experiences with the 
specialists at his local hospital, where he was 
being fed medical babble", says LOOK 
Development Director Jennifer Bowen. "As 
he was an old-hand at all things webby, he 
did not find it too difficult to pinpoint the 
information he required on the net. He then 
decided to simplify the process of finding 
information on vision-related topics.

"The LOOK site became more of a resource, 
and, while still very much in its infancy, the 
reception for it has been terrific. We are 
currently working on a huge new links 
section, with all sites fully described and 
categorised."

The charity regards its web operation is a 
key part of its new focus 

Last year a 'Youth LOOK' Project was 
created after young people complained that 
the organisation needed a stronger youth 
presence. "We want them to be at the centre 
of the organisation," says Ms Bowen. "We 
aim to train a core of 'older' young people to 
lead weekends and forums, and would 
eventually like the whole charity to be run 
by them and their families."

This year, the organisation has also led the 
development of the first national user-led 
research programme into the effects of visual 
impairment on children and their families. In 
a major new study, a team of researchers are 
looking at the effects of the disability on the 
child and family, and the type and amount of 
support families receive from health and 
educational services. They will also talk to 
professionals about issues of access, policy 
and funding.

LOOK Development Director Jennifer 
Bowen says: "Many of us have had to 
struggle with doctors who ignore us, 
teachers who assume visually-impaired 
children's abilities are limited and social 
workers who have no idea what help is 
available. And however knowledgeable 
professionals are in health, education or 
social care, it is the way they work together 
and with families that will shape the 
effectiveness of their care and the quality of 
people's lives."

LOOK wants its Internet activities to sit 
alongside its youth work, keeping all 
interested parties abreast of developments. In 
particular an email list has been set up using 
the free 'Listbot' service so anyone can enter 
their email address, hit the button and 
register to be kept informed of developments 
by email.

In the longer term, the charity wants to spin 
off the 'Youth LOOK' section of its web site 
into an entire sub-site in its own right, with 
online services and information aimed at 
children and young people.

The LOOK site is at:
http://www.look-uk.org/

[Section three ends]


SECTION FOUR: ONLINE LEARNING
- THE 'JOB' PROJECT.

CONSORTIUM SEEKS FUNDING FOR 
NEW 'VIRTUAL COLLEGE'.

A consortium of UK academic and voluntary 
bodies is seeking European funding to 
expand a virtual learning and mentoring 
project to help blind and visually impaired 
people gain employment.

The consortium – led by Learn Net, an 
online training organisation – has already 
completed the first phase of its 'JOB' 
project, which assisted physically disabled 
people. Although it was originally intended 
to include blind people in this work from the 
outset, it proved too expensive to make the 
'virtual college' software interface fully 
accessible as part of phase one. 

JOB was funded under a European 
employment programme for disadvantaged 
groups known as GATE, but this has now 
been replaced by a new programme dubbed 
EQUAL which has a slightly broader focus. 
The consortium are therefore looking at 
other possibilities for European funding such 
as the LEONARDO training programme, for 
which the next round of bids are due in 
January 2001.

The new project will retain the essentials of 
JOB, which allowed people to link from 
their homes via a personal computer to a 
'virtual college' complete with tutors and 
online mentors.

Learn Net tutor Ruth Garner says: "Access 
to a learning environment is often 
problematic for people with disabilities - 
crowds and communal areas may be off-
putting for many. Fluctuations in mental or 
physical health mean that people may miss 
classes, disrupted learning may lead to a 
person with disabilities dropping out and not 
achieving their goals.

"Attendance at a virtual college means 
students can take as long as they want to 
contribute to discussions - often more 
effectively, as time enables a more 
considered response. Thus people experience 
real freedom within a virtual college because 
they are not being physically observed. 
There is more equality of opportunity than in 
a physical classroom."

Blind people stand to benefit a lot from 
inclusion in the second phase project, Garner 
says: "We did have one user in the first 
phase who was partially sighted, and she 
enjoyed the experience because she could 
mix with the other students freely online and 
nobody knew she couldn't see".

The JOB project started in January 1998. 
People who were recruited for JOB were 
loaned a computer, onto which was installed 
a virtual college interface with a study area, 
library, common room and evaluation room.

Virtual mentors were an important part of 
the programme. They 'sat' in the virtual 
common room (from which tutors and 
managers were excluded) and informally 
mixed with the learners to pick up issues and 
offer support, either within the group or 
individually through email. This meant 
issues could be picked up early and tackled 
before they became insurmountable. In 
addition, when a face-to-face meeting was 
needed by the learner, a mentor was sent out 
to work with them in their own home.

"'We originally decided that mentors were 
important because working remotely was 
potentially isolating for the learner", Ms 
Garner says. "What really happened though 
was that learners were not isolated at all, 
because they could make contact with others 
when they wanted to, 24-hours a day.

"Another concern was that we would be 
isolating people with disabilities, but what 
we found was that people had more contact 
with others than they had before the started 
the course. They really enjoyed meeting 
other people through the computer."

Over the 15 week period, learners worked in 
groups of approximately 10 people. Each 
week an activity was set by the tutor and 
learners were asked to discuss this between 
them. The virtual college allowed people to 
work when they wanted to while still being 
able to join in a threaded bulletin board 
discussion. 

Garner says Learn-Net is seeking new 
partners to take its work forward, and would 
be keen to hear from any group in the visual 
impairment community which might be able 
to offer funding or other assistance to help 
develop the next phase of the virtual college 
work. Interested parties can contact her on 
Ruth.Garner@learn-net.co.uk

And there is more information on the JOB 
programme at:
http://www.learn-net.co.uk/JOB.htm
NB: You need the capital letters in 
'JOB.htm' at the end of this web address.

[Section four ends]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-
mail eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe 
eab' in the subject header. You can list other 
email addresses to subscribe in the body of 
the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe 
eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads 
to Dan Jellinek at: dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2000 Headstar Ltd. 
http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin may 
be reproduced in full as long as all parts 
including this copyright notice are included. 
Sections of the report may be quoted as long 
as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-
access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

[Issue ends]
National Helpline: 0800 269545  e-
mail:enquiries@abilitynet.co.uk 
http://www.abilitynet.co.uk  
PO Box94  Warwick  CV34 5WS Tel:  
01926 312847  Fax: 01926 407425
