E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute 
for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind 
Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts]

ISSUE 11, NOVEMBER 2000.

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News.
- Design forum champions usability and 
aesthetics; 20,000 dollar penalty for 
Olympics web site; Canadian institute 
expands digital library; Future bright for web 
accessibility; Disability Commission 
publishes workforce figures.

Section Two: Web accessibility
- Public sector.

Section Three: Education case study
- Washington University.

Section Four: Technology
- Speech enablement.

[Contents ends.]


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

DESIGN FORUM CHAMPIONS 
USABILITY AND AESTHETICS.

Design issues facing young disabled people 
are the subject of a public forum to be hosted 
next month by the Helen Hamlyn Research 
Centre at the Royal College of Art.

Design Challenge 2000, in partnership with 
the Design Business Association (DBA), 
recognises that design can play a crucial role 
in improving the quality of life for disabled 
people.

According to the forum's organisers, four 
million disabled people in the UK use 
equipment or assistive technology to 
improve the quality of their lives. However, 
although many of these products meet the 
specific clinical needs of disabled users, they 
fail to address their aesthetic or lifestyle 
aspirations.

"They are engineered rather than designed 
and stigmatise rather than integrate, even 
where they are intended for use as a 
consumer product."

The forum's launch follows the publication 
of reports by the Department of Trade and 
Industry, the Audit Commission and leading 
disability organisation RADAR on the poor 
design of products and services for disabled 
people.

Some of the UK's leading design 
consultancies have been working with user 
groups ahead of the event to develop design 
initiatives focused on the aspirations of 
younger disabled users, identified as the one 
group most overlooked in all product and 
service categories.

Design consultancy Priestman Goode 
(http://www.priestmangoode.com) is 
developing a 'Sensory Web' interface to aid 
internet browsing and interaction by disabled 
users. And Design House 
(http://www.designhouse.co.uk) is creating 
an accessible interface for a broadband 
internet access using ADSL digital line 
technology.

The Design Challenge site is at:
http://www.hhrc.rca.ac.uk/events/DBAChall
enge/


20,000 DOLLAR PENALTY FOR 
OLYMPICS WEB SITE.

A blow has been struck for web site 
accessibility worldwide with an Australian 
ruling this month that the organisers of this 
year's Sydney Olympics and Paralympics 
must pay 20,000 Australian Dollars' 
compensation to a blind internet user.

Bruce Maguire successfully took action 
against the Olympics committee (SOCOG) 
in Australia's Human Rights and Equal 
Opportunity Commission when SOCOG 
refused to make its websites accessible to 
blind and partially-sighted people (see E-
Access Bulletin, September and October 
issues). On 6 November, the commission 
ordered SOCOG to pay the compensation by 
way of damages for the "pain and suffering" 
they had caused him.

Mr Maguire told E-Access Bulletin this 
week: "This is one of the highest disability 
discrimination damages awards ever made 
under Australian disability legislation, and 
the commissioner's decision makes 
compelling reading in its condemnation of 
the conduct of SOCOG."

The commission's rulings are not legally 
binding unless taken to the Federal Court, 
although Maguire had said he was prepared 
to take the court action if necessary. There 
were fears, however, that the committee – 
set up as a temporary body to oversee the 
Olympics with no ongoing role - might be 
dissolved before the matter could be 
concluded.

Australian politician Lee Rhiannon, a Green 
Party member of the New South Wales 
Legislative Council who had taken up 
Maguire's case on her website 
(www.nsw.greens.org.au/parl/lee), 
discovered recently that there was legislation 
being drafted to wind up SOCOG's 
operations.

"Naturally this was of concern, because it 
meant there might not be anyone to take to 
the Federal Court, and the perpetrators of the 
original discrimination would not be held 
accountable", Maguire said.

After making the discovery, Ms Rhiannon 
began a lobbying campaign to obtain 
assurances from the New South Wales 
Premier and Minister for Sport and the 
Olympics that SOCOG would comply with 
the damages order. Last week SOCOG 
finally confirmed it would comply.


CANADIAN INSTITUTE EXPANDS 
DIGITAL LIBRARY

The Canadian National Institute for the 
Blind has launched a range of innovative 
new digital library services for its users, 
including web and telephone access to daily 
newspapers and a customisable interface to 
accessible web and reference resources.

The 'VISUNET Canada' service includes 
'VisuTEXT', a gateway to accessible digital 
information including electronic books and 
electronic Braille files. Clients can also link 
to web sites selected by CNIB librarians for 
their accessibility and quality; access 
VisuCAT, the Library's online catalogue; 
and browse Encylopedia Britannica online 
and other reference resources.

VisuTEXT also allows CNIB clients to 
customise their online experience so that 
they can easily organise and access Internet 
resources. For example, if clients need 
information on eye conditions, they could 
search the system for relevant magazine and 
journal articles; locate websites relating to 
eye disorders; or search for books and place 
requests for them online.

Another new service, VisuNEWS, allows 
people to use a telephone to listen to any 
stories from the entire content of 13 daily 
newspapers in English and French, or access 
the papers through the library's web site. The 
VISUNET site is at:
http://www.cnib.ca/library/visunet/


FUTURE BRIGHT FOR WEB 
ACCESSIBILITY?

Visually-impaired and disabled people will 
be empowered by the next generation of 
internet software to gain full access to the 
web, according to a new book by Michael G 
Paciello, founder of the web accessibility 
group WebABLE!

The book explains how to make sites 
accessible as well as looking at how 
advances in technology could boost 
accessibility. It explains current accessibility 
initiatives; how to evaluate site accessibility; 
and web design and programming for users 
with disabilities including coding 
techniques.

'Web accessibility for people with 
disabilities' is published by R&D books, 
ISBN: 1929629087. More information, 
including how to order, is at:
http://www.webable.com/book_desc.htm


DISABILITY COMMISSION PUBLISHES 
WORKFORCE FIGURES

Disabled people are only about half as likely 
as non-disabled people to be in employment, 
according to the latest quarterly labour force 
survey from the Disability Rights 
Commission, an independent body set up to 
advise the UK government on civil rights for 
disabled people.

There are currently more than 3.1 million 
disabled people in employment - 12% of all 
people in work.  However, there are more 
than 6.6 million disabled people of working 
age in Great Britain, accounting for nearly a 
fifth of the working age population.

Disabled people are twice as likely as non-
disabled people to have no qualifications, the 
figures show. They were published via the 
commission's web site:
http://www.drc-gb.org/drc/default.asp


[Section One ends]

SECTION TWO: WEB ACCESSIBILITY
- PUBLIC SECTOR

PATCHY RECORD FOR IRISH 
GOVERNMENT

The Irish government has taken a firm stance 
on the accessibility of web sites produced by 
its departments and agencies. It has stated 
that it wants all sites to be fully accessible by 
the end of 2001, and the country's National 
Disability Authority has been invited to 
monitor standards.

However many key sites including that of 
the Department of the Taoiseach (the Irish 
Prime Minister) have a fair amount of 
progress to make. A new accessibility primer 
for public sector officials with responsibility 
for websites, published by web usability 
experts Frontend, confirms that most 
government sites in Ireland are still 
inaccessible.

Using the 'Bobby' international accessibility 
test (http://www.cast.org.bobby), Frontend 
tested three sample sites: Donegal County 
Council (http://www.donegal.ie/dcc); The 
Department of the Taoiseach 
(http://www.irlgov.ie/taoiseach/) and The 
Revenue Commissioners (http://revenue.ie). 
The first two were found to be wholly 
inaccessible. The text-only version of the 
Revenue Commissioners passed the Bobby 
test, although the graphic homepage, which 
is the main point of entry for the text-only 
pages, failed.

The most common problems identified with 
the sites were images missing 'alt' text tags, 
poor use of frames, and poor navigational 
structure, for example with links appearing 
out of context.

The paper sets out how current legislation 
applies to the web, what accessibility means 
and how to apply the right site building 
techniques. 

"Accessibility is a usability issue", it says. 
"Make a commitment to investing in 
usability and accessibility. Your investment 
will produce a measurable return by 
delivering a better service to your customers 
and reducing development times and costs in 
the long run, while reaching a larger 
audience. The sooner you introduce good 
usability and accessibility practise, the 
greater the saving on repairs or "retro-
fitting" a web site to make it accessible.

"Database-driven web sites in particular can 
grow at a tremendous rate, as it is easy to 
add content on a regular basis. If this is not 
accessible, the problems and costs of repair 
are compounded. Investing in usability and 
accessibility will reduce the likelihood of 
suffering potentially expensive legal actions.

"The best practise is to pursue an inclusive 
development process. Involve users who are 
representative of your target audience from 
the onset of your project. Include people 
with disabilities as well as those without."

Local councils in Ireland are involved in an 
accessibility project of their own. The Irish 
branch of the European Institute for Design 
and Disability (http://www.design-for-
all.org/) is carrying out a major campaign 
entitled 'Citizen 2000' to obtain the 
agreement of all local authorities in Ireland, 
North and South, to adopt the Barcelona 
Declaration. This commits them to ensuring 
the access of disabled persons to all 
information they generate.

So far Drogheda, Dublin, Limerick, Wexford 
and Sligo councils have adopted the 
declaration and are in the process of 
completing the formalities of registration. It 
is envisaged the project will take two years 
to complete.

Although there is as yet no direct legislation 
in Ireland concerning web accessibility, 
planned legislation dealing with 
discrimination against people with 
disabilities could be used as a basis for legal 
action against web site providers.

The Taoiseach, Bertie Ahern, has stated his 
commitment to the work: "The preparation 
of a Disabilities Bill will proceed as quickly 
as possible. I would envisage that the Bill 
will cover areas such as access to public 
bodies, the use of telecommunications 
services and participation in the judicial 
system. The providers of basic state services 
will, from today on, have the concerns of 
people with disabilities as part of their core 
work."

An Inter-Departmental Web Publication 
Group chaired by the Department of the 
Taoiseach was set up in 1999 to prepare 
guidelines and standards for public sector 
web sites. Its first report can be found at:
http://www.irlgov.ie/taoiseach/publication/w
ebpg/guidelines.htm

And the Frontend paper, 'Accessibility and 
usability for e-government - a primer for 
public sector officials', is at:
http://www.frontend.com/accessibility_paper
.html

[Section two ends]


SECTION THREE: EDUCATION CASE 
STUDY
- WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY.

ONLINE MENTORING HELPS 
DISABLED STUDENTS DO IT ALL.

Internet-based mentoring, Internet training at 
youth camps and disability awareness 
training for primary school children are 
among the expanding range of innovative 
projects being pioneered by Washington 
University under its 'DO-IT' initiative.

DO-IT – which stands for 'Disabilities, 
Opportunities, Internetworking and 
Technology' – has a Scholars Programme 
which assists 20 disabled maths, science and 
technology high school students from every 
year.

Students accepted onto the scheme must 
show an interest in pursuing a college course 
or career in one of a range of specified fields 
in which people with disabilities are 
traditionally underrepresented, including 
maths, science, technology-related fields and 
business studies.

Other programmes under DO-IT include 
DO-IT Pals, an online community for 
teenagers with disabilities considering 
applying for college or starting a career; and 
DO-IT Campers, in which children and 
young people with disabilities are taught at 
summer camps how to use computers, 
prepare for college and employment and 
network with other students with disabilities. 

All these three programmes are backed up 
by a system of mentoring which takes place 
online, mainly using email lists. Adult 
academics or former students with 
disabilities are matched with current students 
or prospective students with similar 
disabilities, and offer them ongoing advice 
and support.

There is a central email list for all DO-IT 
participants, and separate lists for the DO-IT 
scholars and mentors, plus five groups of 
participants with similar disabilities. 

Imke Durre, a blind former student at 
Washington University, is a DO-IT mentor. 
"I monitor, contribute to, and initiate 
discussions on the DO-IT email lists", she 
says. "As a blind DO-IT Mentor, I am part 
of the general list, the mentors list, and the 
list for participants with visual impairments.

 "Besides participating in list discussions, I 
also exchange emails with individual 
scholars. I have been in particular close 
contact with an eleventh-grader who is blind 
and joined the program this year. We just 
write about our lives, and sometimes she 
asks me questions. These are usually work 
and study related, but often people want to 
talk about personal experiences with their 
disability.

"As a blind individual who has completed a 
PhD in a scientific field (atmospheric 
science), I can share my experiences with 
students who are interested in pursuing a 
career in science or in going to college in 
general. I can provide advice based on my 
own experience and on what I have heard 
and read about others."

DO-IT grew out of a proposal to the 
National Science Foundation by Sheryl 
Burgstahler, IT director at Washington 
University. Its core programme is DO-IT 
Scholars, which has so far had about 25 
blind members.

DO-IT scholars receive adaptive equipment 
on loan, attend summer camps at the 
University of Washington for two 
consecutive years, and are in touch with each 
other and with DO-IT mentors all year-round 
through the scheme's various email lists.

A separate DO-IT project, 'Show and Tell', 
is aimed at younger schoolchildren. It sends 
successful college students with disabilities 
to visit pupils in elementary schools to help 
them develop positive perceptions of people 
with disabilities and experience how people 
with disabilities use computers and perform 
day-to-day tasks.

Presenters share information about their 
disability, set up problem-solving activities 
in which the children participate, answer 
questions, and demonstrate technology.

Imke Durre has been involved in this project 
too, visiting first-grade classes once a week 
to talk to children about what it's like to be 
blind. She demonstrates refreshable Braille 
display and speech output from computers - 
the children love to hear the computer talk. 
She also demonstrates how she uses a cane 
for mobility and brings along a child-size 
cane for the children to try. She shows them 
the alphabet in Braille and produces each 
child's name in Braille for them to keep.

Recently Durre won a University of 
Washington 'Hall of Fame' Award for 
students who have been involved in 
community service and student organisations 
for at least two years, for her involvement in 
the DO-IT program.

For more information see:
http://www.washington.edu/doit/

[Section three ends]


SECTION FOUR: TECHNOLOGY
- SPEECH-ENABLEMENT.

HIGHLANDS COMMUNITY PIONEERS 
VOICE ACCESS.

A major community web site in the Scottish 
Highlands is taking a novel approach to 
speech-enabling its services, using a lesser-
known piece of free software from none 
other than Microsoft.

The Caithness Community Web Site 
(http://www.caithness.org), set up and built 
by volunteers in the most Northerly 
mainland county in Scotland, has grown in 
under two years from a two-page site to a 
300-page resource with more than 600 
visitors a day. It is now the main source of 
information for news and events in the 
region.

The original concept behind the site was to 
offer free web space to every local group and 
business in the county. "It all started with 
Caithness Voluntary Group, where we were 
putting together information about all the 
voluntary organisations in the county", says 
site founder Bill Fernie. "I thought we could 
go one better and prepare a computer 
database, then I thought we may as well put 
all that information on a web site too.

More recently, a desire to make the site more 
accessible to visually impaired and disabled 
people has led to innovative trials of audio 
capability for the site, combining voice 
recognition with speech navigation.

"While we realise that in many ways our site 
is not good for people with sight problems 
we hope to solve these problems by making 
it talk. We are at the start of a trial to see if 
we can make the site have audio and speech 
capabilities. That is the possibility to give 
audio commands and get the web site to 
reply and carry out the orders given by the 
user."

The group is using a free but little-known 
piece of software called Microsoft Agent, a 
voice recognition tool created to work 
towards more intuitive ways for people to 
interact with their computers.

The software is described by Microsoft as "a 
set of services that supports the presentation 
of software agents as interactive 
personalities within the Windows interface. 
Microsoft Agent's conversational interface 
approach is an extension and enhancement 
of the existing interactive modalities of the 
Windows interface".

What this rather confusing waffle often 
seems to mean in practice is a slightly 
irritating little green cartoon parrot that tries 
to help computer users. However the 
Caithness web team, led by Bill Fernie's son 
Niall, has adapted the system for genuine 
voice interaction with the web.

"A couple of years ago while trawling 
newsgroups for web design tips I came 
across a discussion about the Bobby web 
accessibility project", Niall says.

"I am a JavaScript programmer and this was 
a big no-no with Bobby. It seemed to me that 
instead of trying to advance the technology 
of the web, this project was going to take it 
back to the Dark Ages. I could not get my 
head round the reasons for giving visually 
impaired people such a raw deal.

"So I introduced the newsgroup to MS 
Agent. Many were amazed with the 
possibilities and with the addition of a small 
plug-in called the 'Agent Powertoy' from 
Costas Andriotis 
(http://members.theglobe.com/costas5/windo
ws_05.htm) they could see how much better 
Agent was than the other text-reading 
software. The only limitation I saw was the 
interface between user and PC but as far as 
reading web pages is concerned I feel it is 
second to none.

"This prompted me to start work using the 
speech recognition engine also supplied free 
from Microsoft as it was already integrated 
with MS Agent. This I felt could bridge the 
gap for people who could not see the screen 
to select passages or pages to be read.

"With the business pages on the Community 
Site a perfect candidate for another project of 
mine - the removal of all the HTML - I knew 
that this would render them unreadable by 
most text readers but a perfect testing ground 
for MS Agent. Voice navigation and the 
ability to request information from any page 
is my long term goal. As all of the text most 
users see on the screen is created by 
JavaScript I would like to have all of the text 
users can read from the screen be read by 
Agent."

So far, the Caithness site's business section 
is the only area to implement the technology. 
As E-Access Bulletin went to press, the 
section was being transferred to a new 
server, but should be back online within a 
few days and the team is welcoming 
feedback from blind users from next week.

"So far it's going well, and we each have 
readout functions on our PCs", says Bill. 
"This can read any website, not just our own. 
The opening business page will have a 
limited audio function and response to audio 
commands, after the Agent software has 
been installed on the user's computer. All of 
the instructions are on the site but we are 
encouraging people to get in touch if they 
have problems.

"We hope to be in a position eventually to 
add full readout functions and possibly even 
the ability to go into other web sites from 
Caithness.org and have them read out as 
well.

"We think Microsoft Agent has good 
possibilities and are surprised that the 
software - which we understand is aimed at 
speech engines for typing - has not been 
used in this way before. We would be 
interested to hear from anyone involved in 
similar projects".

Bulletin readers with knowledge of similar 
work can contact Bill Fernie on 
bill@caithness.org

And the Microsoft Agent home page is at:
http://msdn.microsoft.com/msagent/default.a
sp


[Section four ends]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-
mail eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe 
eab' in the subject header. You can list other 
email addresses to subscribe in the body of 
the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe 
eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads 
to Dan Jellinek at: dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2000 Headstar Ltd. 
http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin may 
be reproduced in full as long as all parts 
including this copyright notice are included. 
Sections of the report may be quoted as long 
as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-
access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

[Issue ends]
National Helpline: 0800 269545  e-
mail:enquiries@abilitynet.co.uk 
http://www.abilitynet.co.uk  
PO Box94  Warwick  CV34 5WS Tel:  
01926 312847  Fax: 01926 407425
