E-ACCESS BULLETIN

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.

http://www.e-accessibility.com

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the 
Blind
http://www.rnib.org.uk
the National Library for the Blind
http://www.nlbuk.org
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
http://www.gdba.org.uk

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing eab-subs@headstar.com
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts]

ISSUE 9, 2000

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News
- Olympics committee faces legal action over 
inaccessible web site; Battle is joined for e-
books standard; New breed of Adobe pdf files 
easier to navigate; 'Visugate' builds web of 
information partners; European Commission 
targets accessibility; Family site wins charity 
web awards.

Section Two: Education
- Books by CD-ROM

Section Three: Web accessibility
- Internet shopping

Section Four: Back to basics
- Digital books and other texts

[Contents ends]

SECTION ONE: NEWS

OLYMPICS COMMITTEE FACES LEGAL 
ACTION OVER INACCESSIBLE WEB SITE

The organisers of the Olympic Games in Sydney 
face legal action on two fronts for failing to 
make their web site accessible to blind people, 
with both individual and class actions a 
possibility after the games close this weekend, E-
Access Bulletin has learned.

The Sydney Organising Committee for the 
Olympic Games (SOCOG) has already lost an 
Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity 
Commission hearing held last year after a 
discrimination complaint was lodged by Bruce 
Maguire, who is blind. However despite having a 
year since then to make the site fully accessible, 
SOCOG refused, saying the process would be 
too expensive and time-consuming.

Some changes have been made to the site, with 
'alt-text' tags being added to some images and 
text links added to image maps. However, 
Maguire says that not all images have been text-
tagged, and other problems persist, such as the 
accessibility of the Olympics results tables.

Although the commission ruling is not legally 
binding, Maguire told E-Access Bulletin this 
week that as soon as the games are over he will 
seek a further hearing to win damages under 
Australia's Disability Discrimination Act, and 
seek enforcement in Australia's Federal Court if 
SOCOG refuse to comply. There is also a 
possibility that a class action will be brought 
against SOCOG by blind people in Australia, he 
said.

Also under fire is IBM, which designed the site 
for SOCOG. IBM gave evidence in the initial 
hearing that the site would take 368 days to fix at 
a cost of two million US Dollars, although 
Maguire successfully called two expert witnesses 
to assert that the true cost of fixing it would be 
30,000 Dollars, and that it would take just 2-4 
weeks.

" I don't think of myself as an activist, in that I 
don't go looking for inaccessibility", he said. 
"However, if I encounter it in the course of my 
daily life, I do feel that I have some 
responsibility to try and overcome it.

"In general, I believe that accessibility can best 
be achieved through dialogue, education and 
consensus-building: however, disability 
discrimination legislation is useful when these 
processes fail, and as part of the ongoing task of 
creating a culture of respect for the principles of 
access and equity".

A handy guide to the  Sydney Olympics 
Accessibility Complaint, including a link to last 
year's ruling, has been produced by contenu.nu, 
a web content consultancy in Toronto:
http://www.contenu.nu/socog.html

And Lee Rhiannon, a Green Party member of the 
New South Wales legislative council, has taken 
up Maguire's case and created an online petition 
to IBM. This can be found at:
http://www.nsw.greens.org.au/parl/lee/ibmpetitio
n.html


BATTLE IS JOINED FOR E-BOOKS 
STANDARD

Software giants Microsoft and Adobe Systems 
have made new moves in their battle to create a 
dominant standard for 'e-books' – digitised book 
software and hardware.

Microsoft has announced a partnership with 
leading online bookshop Amazon.com to create a 
customised versions of its Microsoft Reader e-
book software, allowing Internet users to buy 
and download e-books from the bookshop. The 
deal was announced at:
http://www.microsoft.com/PressPass/press/2000/
Aug00/AmazonPR.asp

Amazon does not actually sell e-books yet, 
although it plans to in the near future. However 
Barnes and Noble 
(http://www.barnesandnoble.com), another major 
online bookshop, is leading the way in this field 
and already offers e-books for purchase and 
download in three different formats: Microsoft 
Reader, Glassbook (http://www.glassbook.com) 
and Rocket eBook (http://www.rocket-
ebook.com/).

Microsoft hopes to overtake the other two 
formats by dint of its general market dominance 
with Windows PCs. Rocket eBook is a 
proprietary system, produced by 1997 start-up 
company NuvoMedia, while Glassbook has 
recently been acquired by Adobe Systems, as 
part of its bid to rival Microsoft by enhancing its 
own e-book system based on its Portable 
Document Format (pdf) software.

Glassbook's latest software (and indeed 
Microsoft Reader as well) includes text-to-
speech capabilities, text annotation and 
highlighting with electronic sticky notes, 
searching and text enhancement facilities that are 
intended to make content easier to read. See:
http://www.glassbook.com/news/pr082800.htm

The e-books market is new but potentially 
lucrative. E-books have obvious advantages for 
blind and visually impaired people, as they can 
usually be readily converted into speech or 
Braille, but they are predicted to increase in 
popularity across a range of users as e-book 
readers become more portable and offer quick, 
mobile access to large libraries of books.

* See also Section Four, this issue: 'Back to 
basics – digital books'.


NEW BREED OF ADOBE PDF FILES EASIER 
TO NAVIGATE

In a separate development, Adobe has stated that 
the new version of its Acrobat Reader software 
for Portable Document Format (pdf) files will be 
accessible to screen readers. Past versions of pdf 
have been widely attacked for their 
inaccessibility, with their reliance on graphical 
layouts rather than plain text.

According to a report in Federal Computer Week 
- which was posted up by Adobe on its 
accessibility site last month and hence implicitly 
endorsed – the new Acrobat Reader due next 
spring and its associated new pdf file creation 
tools will incorporate easy text navigation into 
documents, whatever their length or graphical 
layout.

The system will work best with new files but 
may also help make old pdf files more accessible 
to screen reader. The report can be accessed 
from:
http://access.adobe.com/


'VISUGATE' BUILDS WEB OF 
INFORMATION PARTNERS

The 'Visugate' project to create an accessible 
online gateway to a huge range of existing and 
newly digitised resources on visual impairment 
has already signed up 20 partner organisations to 
provide information through the service.

The 20 include RNIB's Research Library; Action 
for Blind People; The British Journal of Visual 
Impairment; the International Centre for Eye 
Health; the Department of Education at 
University of Birmingham and BT Soundings. 
Other partners are now being approached, and 
the National Library for the Blind, which is 
overseeing the project, says there is no limit to 
the potential number of organisations that can 
become involved.

The NLB is conducting a survey of potential 
Visugate users to ask them what resources and 
functionality they would like to see included in 
the service. For more information contact Joanna 
Widdows on joanna.widdows@nlbuk.org or visit 
the organisation's web site:
http://www.nlbuk.org/


EUROPEAN COMMISSION TARGETS 
ACCESSIBILITY

The European Commission is to place 
information society accessibility issues at the 
heart of of its annual 'IST' information society 
technologies conference in Nice, France from 6-
8 November.

The 'Information society for all' conference will 
build on the commission's recent 'eEurope' 
policy proposals with an 'e-participation' track 
that will focus on three areas: European 
government and democracy; e-health; and the 
active participation and integration of all, 
especially people with disabilities and older 
adults.

The event's web site is at:
http://istevent.cec.eu.int/en/


FAMILY SITE WINS CHARITY WEB 
AWARDS

A charity which supports the parents and 
families of children born with disabilities – 
including blindness - has won the 'Charity 
Internet Site of the Year' award presented earlier 
this month by the Charity Times.

The 'Contact a Family' site 
(http://www.cafamily.org.uk/) was praised for its 
design, navigability and use of access keys to 
ensure accessibility. Judges for the award 
included RNIB campaigns officer Julie Howell. 
Other sites shortlisted included YouthNet UK, 
creators of the youth advice service 'TheSite' 
(http://www.thesite.org/).

The award's web address is:
http://www.charity-
times.co.uk/ukcharityawards.htm

[Section one ends]


SECTION TWO: EDUCATION
- BOOKS BY CD-ROM

FROM READING TREE TO INTERACTIVE 
CD – A LABOUR OF LOVE

A specialist schoolteacher from Croydon has just 
completed a two-year labour of love to create a 
nationwide CD-ROM book service for 
schoolchildren with visual impairments.

Val Lawson, who teaches visually impaired 
children for Croydon Local Education Authority 
(LEA), found that her pupil's needs were not 
being met by existing services. She told E-
Access Bulletin: "Many disabled children are 
now in mainstream schools, and making the 
curriculum accessible is a huge issue.  Lots of 
young people with visual impairment also have 
other physical disabilities, which means they 
may have trouble holding a book or turning the 
pages, as well as reading text and pictures. Many 
of these children with are being taught in 
mainstream classes by teachers with no 
specialised experience.

"The Oxford Reading Tree - which is the main 
programme for teaching young children to read 
in 80 per cent of primary schools - does have 
tape and Braille versions, but this is not 
necessarily the most suitable format for visually 
impaired or disabled students."

Having decided to take action herself to address 
the lack or resources, Ms Lawson started out 
producing popular, illustrated books in CD 
format with digitised text, illustrations that were 
simplified and enhanced for visually impaired 
children, audio navigation tools and other 
accessibility features. Originally, books selected 
by children and teachers were modified on 
request, but the new versions were proving so 
popular that she decided to pilot materials from a 
pre-existing structured reading programme - the 
reading tree - and make them available for loan.

"This was a difficult time, because these pilot 
materials were not of sufficiently high quality for 
general release", she says. "I had managed to get 
permission from Oxford University Press to use 
their material, and had generated lots of interest 
from local education authorities, but I just didn't 
have time during the day to do the work.  So I 
upgraded my home computer and started 
working on the project at home."

Ms Lawson started by modifying every book 
illustration to remove backgrounds and enhance 
colour and definition.

"The big breakthrough came when I discovered 
Adobe Acrobat software," she says. "I found that 
by producing a menu system with links to and 
from various files, I could not only make an 
easy-to-use electronic format, but also compress 
the material so that all 112 books in the reading 
tree could fit on to one CD. The project then 
took on a life of its own and consumed mine for 
two years."

With little financial or technical support, Ms 
Lawson found the main cost was replacing and 
upgrading all her home equipment, as her PC did 
not have the memory to deal with complex 
graphic manipulation.

She also managed to get some help from a US 
software company, Fileopen systems 
(http://www.fileopen.com/), in the form of a free 
copy of the company's 2,500 US Dollar security 
package. This protects all the files from 
unauthorised access, ensuring copyright cannot 
be breached.

"Given the restricted market, I knew I was going 
to have to set quite a high price for the CD to 
recoup some of my costs, but I was worried that 
educational services might not be able to afford 
it", she says. "So I decided to offer a master 
copy, printable version, to my local education 
authority for them to distribute to other visually 
impaired services on a non-profit making basis, 
and was delighted when they offered not only to 
distribute it free, but also to help with publicity."

There are two versions of the CD. The first has a 
licence to print one copy built into the 
installation code, and has been restricted to a 
specific audience because of copyright 
limitations. The second version works solely on 
screen.

"The screen version was a total act of faith on 
my part," says Ms Lawson. "The first child who 
tried to use it was a six year old girl with central 
vision loss. She thought it was wonderful. She 
found the display easy to read, loved the pictures 
and mastered the navigation system in minutes. 
She then spent about 45 minutes showing off her 
reading and IT skills to everyone else in the 
room!"

The screen-only version has layout in a 
landscape format which fills the entire screen. 
Menu navigation is supported by speech and 
may be driven by touch-screen if required. The 
menu links have voice-overs, activated by the 
mouse when it enters the menu zone. A click of 
the mouse turns each page, and the final screen 
allows a choice of reading the story again, or 
finishing and returning to the main menu.

Ms Lawson is looking for feedback from other 
people using the CD. For further information 
visit her website at:
http://www.largeprint.org/

And the Oxford Reading Tree site is at:
http://www.oup.co.uk/oxed/primary/ort/

[Section two ends]


SECTION THREE: WEB ACCESSIBILITY
- INTERNET SHOPPING

HIGH STREET CHAINS MAKE POOR 
PROGRESS ON WEB DESIGN

By rights, Internet shopping should be a 
Godsend for blind and partially sighted people, 
allowing them to browse and buy whatever they 
want without having to negotiate crowded shops 
and public transport.

But a report just published by the Royal National 
Institute for the Blind shows the truth is 
somewhat different: blind people are in fact 
being excluded from the e-shopping revolution 
through lazy web design and ignorance on the 
part of site owners. What is more the culprits – 
major high street names among them – could be 
rendering themselves liable to prosecution under 
the Disability Discrimination Act. 

Julie Howell, resident web accessibility expert at 
the RNIB and the report's author, says: 'The Act 
requires that all service providers should make 
information about their companies and services 
accessible for blind or partially-sighted people. 
Even our biggest high street stores are clearly not 
doing this.

"It's not just a question of legality, these 
businesses are losing a potential 8.5 million 
disabled customers too."

The RNIB first investigated the web sites of 17 
major high street stores and banks last year, so 
companies have had 12 months to get their act 
together. The 17 were Abbey National, Alliance 
and Leicester, Asda, Debenhams, Dorothy 
Perkins, Evans, HSBC, Marks and Spencer, 
NatWest, Pizza Hut, Pizza Express, Post Office, 
Safeway, Sainsburys, Somerfield, Tesco and WH 
Smith.

The new report follows up on the original 
findings, and pronounces the results 'extremely 
disappointing'. All the companies failed to 
measure up in at least one of five different test 
categories used, and some failed in all five.

The test categories were:
1. Is the web site text legible, with strong visual 
contrast?
2. Does every image have a text tag, which can 
be converted to speech description?
3. Are alternatives offered to framed sites?
4. Is the site available in HTML, as opposed to 
image, pdf or other formats?
5. Do all pages pass the 'Bobby' test – the 
standard software package which tests for 
accessibility? (see http://www.cast.org/bobby)

"All three high street banks we visited failed the 
test, even though banking is supposed to be a 
universally essential service", says Howell. 
"Online supermarkets also performed 
particularly badly. The only company which did 
reasonably well was Marks and Spencer."

One case study described in the report is that of 
Peter, who is blind and has been using the 
internet for three years using a PC and JAWS 
screen reader. Peter heard about the Debenhams 
summer sale on TV, and tried subsequently to 
log onto the store's web site.

"What a disappointment", he said. "I wanted to 
check the availability of men's shirts, but I kept 
hearing 'unsupported script'. It was really 
confusing. I did find some information 
eventually, but it took me so long to work my 
way past the nonsense, it would probably have 
been quicker to go to the store."

Another disabled user, Caroline, was asked to try 
out the Safeway website and do some home 
grocery shopping. She uses a PW Webspeak 
browser. She said: "It would really help me if 
heavy things like cat food could be delivered to 
my home. I think I'm quite good with the 
internet, but I found the Safeway site a real 
struggle. I kept hearing 'image, image' and 
didn't know what was going on.  I just gave up 
in the end."

The Abbey National site failed all five tests, 
because it was designed in Macromedia Flash, 
with no HTML alternative. A spokesman told 
EAB that the company was now working on an 
HTML site which would be fully accessible. 
Pizza Hut and Abbey National are also working 
on new, accessible sites.

Ms Howell said: "Poor or careless coding of 
HTML and complex screen designs are the most 
common problems, but most of the companies 
we tested are now trying to address this in 
response to the report."

An executive summary of 'Get the message 
online: making internet shopping accessible' can 
be viewed at:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/digital/webshop.htm

The full report can be purchased for £5 from 
RNIB customer services. Email 
CServices@rnib.org.uk or telephone 0845 702 
3153.

[Section three ends]


SECTION FOUR: BACK TO BASICS
- DIGITAL BOOKS AND OTHER TEXTS

One of the ways in which the Internet is proving 
a liberating resource for blind and visually 
impaired people is as a repository of electronic 
texts. For the first time, a wide range of books, 
newspapers, journals, periodicals and articles are 
available online, 24-hours a day, to be accessed 
at the reader's convenience.

Combined with email services and computer 
disks or CD-ROMs with digitised texts send 
through the post, the result – thanks to special 
access software like text-to-speech - is access for 
the first time by blind people to the information 
they want, when they want it. No more waiting 
for others to transcribe it to Braille or read it 
aloud: no more restriction to the information, or 
extracts from the information, that others 
arbitrarily decide is of most interest.

The vast majority of digital texts available online 
are in ASCII (plain text) format, and can thus be 
read by any computer whether PC or Mac, DOS 
or Windows. The following is a round-up of 
digitised plain text resources on the Internet and 
in other media.

PROJECT GUTENBERG

The awesome Gutenberg project is a volunteer-
driven initiative to transcribe copyright-free 
books into digital format. Gutenberg has already 
made about 2,500 texts available for free online 
including classic works of literature.

The books are entered onto a database in 'plain 
vanilla ASCII' – the plainest of plain text 
formats, with for example italics, underlines and 
bolds all represented by capital letters.

Project Gutenberg has the goal of turning two 
million conventional books (mostly titles already 
out of copyright) into electronic texts freely 
available on the internet. The site includes 
several easy ways of finding a book: by title, 
author, subject or even by other details including 
language, version or author's birth-date. Once 
you have located a title, it can be downloaded 
onto your computer to read offline at your 
leisure.

Visit the site at http://www.gutenberg.net/ and 
click on "E-Text Listings" to obtain a full listing 
of all titles available, or "search" to search on 
any of the criteria mentioned above. This site, 
however, was not designed with visual 
impairment in mind and some people may not 
find it easy to read or screen-reader-friendly.


NATIONAL LIBRARY FOR THE BLIND

The NLB site, designed for easy access by those 
with a visual-impairment and found at 
www.nlbuk.org, is a good source of electronic 
texts and contains some valuable areas such as 
'Where can I get ideas about new books to read?' 
and 'The Fiction Cafe (Books for young 
people)'.


THE INTERNET PUBLIC LIBRARY

Visit http://www.ipl.org/reading/books/ for 
another very useful resource of electronic texts 
arranged in 10 easy-to-browse categories 
including languages, natural sciences and 
mathematics, the arts and literature and rhetoric.

Although the site is not written with visual 
impairment in mind, no frames or side-menus 
mean that it is quite accessible.


THE ONLINE BOOKS PAGE

This site at 
http://digital.library.upenn.edu/books/lists.html 
is an index of more than 12,000 English works 
which are available free of charge and as full 
texts on the Internet. The service is part of the 
Digital Library Project of the University of 
Pennsylvania.


THE TALKING NEWSPAPER ASSOCIATION 
OF THE UK

The TNAUK site at http://www.tnauk.org.uk/ 
offers access to more than 200 titles on tape, 
disk, e-mail or downloadable from their website, 
for a subscription charge of 20 UK Pounds a 
year. Texts available include daily newspapers 
and weekly magazines, as well as other monthly 
and quarterly publications. A full listing of all 
their publications in all formats is available on 
the website or by telephone on 01435 866102.

Their website has black on grey text that may 
cause problems in reading for some, and contains 
formatting that is not fully accessible although 
there is a link to a text-only version. The direct 
address of the "text only" version is 
http://www.tnauk.org.uk/TextSite/Introduction.ht
m


RNIB ELECTRONIC PUBLICATIONS

A full catalogue of all publications available 
from the RNIB can be obtained on disk from 
them or viewed on their website at 
http://www.rnib.org.uk/  More than 40 titles are 
available on disk including the 'New Beacon'.


THE DAISY CONSORTIUM

The next generation of talking books will be 
based on electronic formats. These special CDs 
will be played on e-book readers or on 
computers with the correct player software.

E-books that conform to the 'DAISY' 
consortium standard can combine a digital 
recording of a human voice reading the book 
with the text of the book in electronic form. The 
two can interact so that it is easy to move 
through the book by chapter, page, sub-headings 
or even to search for phrases or single words, 
from which point the spoken playback can 
instantly continue.

For further information visit 
http://www.daisy.org/

* This article was produced in association with 
AbilityNet, a charity concerned with all areas of 
computing and every disability, which acts as an 
independent assessor of access technologies. For 
more information contact AbilityNet on 
freephone 0800 269545, email: 
enquiries@abilitynet.co.uk
or see its web site:
http://www.abilitynet.co.uk/

[Section four ends]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin,
e-mail eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe 
eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in 
the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to 
sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' 
in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to
Dan Jellinek at: dan@headstar.com


Published by Headstar Ltd
http://www.headstar.com
Copyright 2000 Headstar Ltd

The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long 
as all parts including this copyright notice are 
included. Sections of the report may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-
access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', 
and our web site address http://www.e-
accessibility.com is also cited.

[Issue ends]




14

National Helpline: 0800 269545  e-
mail:enquiries@abilitynet.co.uk 
http://www.abilitynet.co.uk  
PO Box94  Warwick  CV34 5WS Tel:  01926 
312847  Fax: 01926 407425
