+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 100, April 2008.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the
end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 100 Contents.

01: Launch For Digital TV 'Easy To Install' Badging Scheme
- Research body Ricability approves first six Freeview recorders.

02: E-Learning Access Research Project Comes To UK
- Open University Hosts May Workshop.

03: Councils Urged To Mix Technical Web Tests With User Tests
- Accessibility report urges twin approach to halt declining standards.

News in Brief: 04: Conference Time - E-Access '08 set for success;
05: Controversial Statements - American Express online format row;
06: Librarian's Guide - web access book.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Support Sources - technology help links; 08: Design Hurdles -
user testing plea.

Section Three: Organisation in the Spotlight - Ricability.
09: The Consumer's Champion: With its roots in the early consumer
movement 50 years ago, Ricability is a unique research charity with a
focus on helping the elderly, disabled and disadvantaged. Majeed Saleh
reports on the central role it is set to play in helping people switch to
digital TV.

Section Four: Focus - Web Accessibility.
10: The Power of Five: According to a new report from the Society of
IT Management (Socitm), five errors account for 76% of all website
accessibility failures. In an edited extract from the research, Robin
Christopherson outlines all five and how to avoid them.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: E-Access '08: Three Days To Go
- Landmark Annual Event on Access to Technology by All
- 23 April, Central London
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess08/

E-Access Bulletin's fourth annual conference and exhibition on access
to technology by people with disabilities is on 23 April, sponsored by
Fortune Cookie and supported by E-Access Bulletin, RNIB and Ability
Magazine.

A fantastic line-up will look at issues surrounding access to the web; e-
learning and education; digital TV switchover; accessible books; and
employment issues. This is the place for all organisations in all sectors
to find out how to comply with the law and how to make the best use
of the talents of all your staff, students and service users.

Delegate rates are just £195 for public sector, £295 for private sector
and £165 for small charities and non-profits (turnover under £150k).
Book today for your last minute place, at:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess08/

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Launch For Digital TV 'Easy To Install' Badging Scheme.

A new scheme to badge certain digital TV products as 'easy to install'
for older people and people with disabilities has been launched this
week by the independent research charity Ricability.

Ricability - the former research arm of the consumer body Which? - is
running the project in association with Digital UK, the broadcaster-
funded body charged with overseeing the switchover from analogue to
digital TV signals across the UK between now and 2012.

The 'Easy to install' research programme will test a wide range of
digital TV recorders, set-top receivers and interactive digital TV sets
(iDTVs) to identify those which are easy to install and retune at home
without specialist assistance.

Product elements evaluated include packaging, labelling and
instructions; accessories supplied such as leads and batteries; the user
interface including on-screen menus and remote controls; the ease of
first-time installation and retuning; and customer support including
helplines and websites.

Ricability has issued its first 'Easy to install' badges to six Freeview
Playback Digital TV recorders following tests earlier this year ahead of
the full project launch. The six are the Digihome DTR160; the
Goodmans GHD1621F2; the Humax Duovisio PVR-9200TB; the
Technika AEDTR160S7; the Topfield TF5810PVRt and the
Wharfedale 160DTR. Summary and detailed test reports for the six can
be found online at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/ric2 .

In May and June the charity will be testing and awarding further
badges to a range of set top boxes and iDTVs. The scheme is for self-
installed products but the chairty also notes that many satellite, cable
and phone based services like Sky, Virgin and BT Vision will install
equipment for users, and some electrical retailers will also install
equipment at a cost.

NOTE: For a full report on the history and work of Ricability see
Section Three, this issue.


+02: E-Learning Access Research Project Comes To UK.

A European research programme to improve access to e-learning
platforms and courses by people with disabilities, with a special focus
on distance learning, is to hold a consultation meeting in the UK next
month.

The Accessible e-Learning Platform for Europe (ALPE) (
https://adenu.ia.uned.es/alpe/) complements the European accessible
learning programme EU4ALL ( http://www.eu4all-project.eu/).

The UK workshop is being hosted by the Open University in Milton
Keynes on 7 May ( http://eu4all.open.ac.uk/alpe/). The project is
focused on learning about creating accessible content and delivery,
while the project's business partners will analyse the commercial
aspects of the European accessibility market.

Other partners in ALPE include the leading Spanish IT solutions and
consultancy Indra, which is leading the project; UNED, the Spanish
equivalent of Open University; and the Greek research body MetisNet.
"The ALPE project has been a great opportunity to share findings with
other project partners to understand the differences between the
different countries," Christopher Douce of Open University told E-
Access Bulletin.


+03: Councils Urged To Mix Technical Web Tests With User Tests.

Local councils should carry out both technical accessibility testing and
user testing of their websites to minimise exclusion of people with
disabilities, and not just take one or other approach, a new report from
the local government Society of IT Management (Socitm) finds.

The report, a special supplement to Socitm's annual 'Better connected'
review of all UK council websites, examines the reasons behind an
alarming downward trend in accessibility in 2008. The accessibility of
UK local council websites fell by almost 50 per cent since last year,
with just 37 out of the UK's 468 council websites achieved the most
basic technical standard of accessibility in 2008 - level 'A' of the
World Wide Web consortium's web content accessibility guidelines
(see E-Access Bulletin issue 99, March 2008 for further reporting on
the Socitm findings).

The society's new supplement says that to avoid future problems
councils should combine technical accessibility testing with user
testing. The former is defined as measurable points that allow access;
the latter as evaluation of actual attempts to perform tasks on a website.

"A site that offers good technical accessibility might not be usable by
disabled people, if the layout and other issues do not take their needs
into account," the report says. "It is not the case that organisations
should follow one approach or the other. They should follow both.

"The one approach considers the key technical guidelines that should
be adopted across the site. The other approach considers the many
different perspectives of a website that depend on the tasks to be
undertaken, the specific characteristics of the disability and the many
different combinations of technology that one might be using.

"It is quite feasible that any failures in meeting technical guidelines
may not apply in any single user experience, but they are very likely to
apply in a significant percentage of user experiences. Equally, it is
quite feasible that any failure in a single user experience may not relate
to any of the technical guidelines and that this might be the case in a
large number of user experiences."

The supplement also finds that five common errors account for 76% of
all types of technical accessibility failure reported by RNIB, and that
removing them would increase by up to 50% the number of technically
accessible council sites.
NOTE: For a full report on the five common errors see section four,
this issue.


++News in Brief:

+04: Conference Time: Flash and accessibility; Managing e-access in
large organisations; Technology aids for disabled students and Access
to digital TV - moving to digital switchover are among the 10 plenary
and workshop sessions at this week's E-Access '08. The biggest ever
annual conference on access to technology by people with disabilities
is hosted at Church House Conference Centre, Westminster, by
Headstar, publishers of E-Access Bulletin. Sign up online for a last-
minute place:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess08

+05: Controversial Statements: According to BBC reports, online
credit card statements from American Express have become less
accessible to blind people since December after the company shifted
from HTML formatting to PDF as the main way of viewing statements.
According a recent Radio 4 Money Box programme, HTML versions
are still available but harder to find:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/bbc7 .
In an update last week, the BBC reported that the person who raised
the complaint with Money Box, Richard Godfrey-McKay, a blind
solicitor from Perth in Scotland, was now threatening to sue American
Express unless the problem was sorted out within days. A
spokeswoman for American Express told the BBC the company was
"working with Mr Godfrey-McKay to understand the problems" and
said a range of alternative formats were offered including large print
and Braille:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/bbc8 .

+06: Librarian's Guide: A guide book on web accessibility and
usability aimed at library and information professionals has been
published by Facet Publishing, the new name for the former Library
Association Publishing. The book is edited by Jenny Craven and
focuses on UK legislation and regulations:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/bbc9 .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Fortune Cookie
- Web Sites That Really Work.

Fortune Cookie's dedicated web accessibility team makes sure that
everyone finds the web sites we design easy to use. As well as being
accessible, Fortune Cookie sites are beautiful and deliver stunning
return-on-investment. They're award-winning too. In 2007, our work
was nominated for major web design awards 11 times.

Legal & General, Kuoni, Diabetes UK, FT Business - just some of the
big name brands on Fortune Cookie's client list.

Every business can benefit from making its web site more accessible.
If you'd like to know what accessibility can do for your business, talk
to Fortune Cookie.

Visit our web site at:
http://www.fortunecookie.co.uk

Julie Howell is our Director of Accessibility. Email Julie at:
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Support Sources: Last issue we published an enquiry from reader
Patty Arnold about an apparently discontinued Access Technology
Primer from the former National Library for the Blind, comprised of a
series of free online training courses.

We have since received two helpful responses from staff at the RNIB,
into which the NLB merged last year.

Jon Hardisty, Senior Librarian Digital Services at RNIB, said: "I'm
sorry to say that the Access Tech Primer is no longer available. It was a
funded project undertaken by National Library for the Blind several
years ago, and the content was increasingly out of date, as the access
tech packages covered were gradually updated by the software
companies. This was perhaps reflected by the extremely low level of
usage the site was receiving towards the end of its life.

"RNIB maintains a list of alternative sources of training and advice on
the technology section of the RNIB website
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/technology), see particularly the 'information
sheets' section."

And Steve Griffiths, Access Technology Trainer at RNIB, adds: "The
Access Technology Primer has been discontinued.

"NLB and RNIB merged recently, and as part of that the NLB website
has been incorporated into RNIB's. As an internal trainer in access
technology I was asked to comment on the JAWS and ZoomText
tutorials on the NLB site and my feeling was that they needed to be
updated. We don't have the resources to do this update, and my
understanding is that they were scrapped because of this.

"That's the bad news. The good news is that there is lots of material for
the applications available from the relevant manufacturers.

http://www.aisquared.com/tutorial/ is a tutorial for ZoomText 9.1 (the
current version) that can be run online or downloaded.

http://www.aisquared.com/Support/Documentation.cfm has links to
download a quick reference guide or more complete user's guide for
the last few versions of ZoomText.

http://fastlink.headstar.com/jaws3 gives access to a number of
documents [on the JAWS screenreader]. The 'Quick start guides' are
effectively tutorials for new users.

http://fastlink.headstar.com/jaws4 has a series of downloadable MP3 or
DAISY files for various JAWS features, including a link to Surf's Up,
which is about using JAWS on web pages. Surf's Up can also be
viewed online.

http://www.yourdolphin.com/support.asp gives a variety of resources
for Lunar, Hal and other Dolphin products.

"All the above sites are updated regularly when new versions are
released."


+08: Design Hurdles: David Bates, Chair of the National Federation of
the Blind West Midlands Branch, writes in with a comment on website
accessibility, particularly as relates to local councils, the subject of
recent stories in E-Access Bulletin.

He writes: "Having recently lost my sight I access websites using a
screen reader, and because I can't read the screen I usually turn it off to
save power, navigating by listening to the voice, which reads onward
from wherever the cursor has been placed by the web designer.

"Most council website staff could easily optimise their own websites
for blind users by loading a screen reading programme onto their
computer and thoroughly checking their own website by listening to
the voice with their computers monitor turned off.

"They would then encounter the built-in difficulties, including
continuity problems where a link opens a new page with the cursor in
the wrong place, requiring several minutes of listening before the
cursor reaches the chosen section, and trying to listen to the same piece
a second time by returning an invisible cursor back to the start of the
piece.

"Many web designers seem very reluctant to try the navigation hurdles
which they set for their blind users, preferring to leave such checking
tasks to blind people who are unlikely to understand the possibilities of
the accurate cursor location which makes so much difference to
accessibility. Can the experts design accessible websites, or must they
be led by the blind?"

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com]

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three: Organisation in the Spotlight
- Ricability.

+09: The Consumer's Champion
by Majeed Saleh.

With the switchover to digital TV rolling across the UK between now
and 2012, blind people and people with impaired vision, who
paradoxically are major watchers of TV, have more to cope with than
most in finding and installing the best new receiving, viewing and
recording equipment.

Although there is a national Digital TV Help Scheme offering
(relatively) accessible digital TV receiver equipment and installation
support at a low cost and free to people on benefits, people will often
still be faced with tough choices about which equipment to choose or
use when they want to buy outside of this scheme, or share a household
with others.

It is fortunate then that one organisation has been testing every major
piece of digital TV equipment to come on the market for the past three
years with a specific focus on use by people with disabilities, and will
continue doing so for some time to come. This organisation is
Ricability (
http://www.ricability.org.uk/),
a unique charity whose origins date back more than 50 years to the
birth of the UK consumer rights movement.

Ricability's roots are in the Consumer Association (CA) - now known
simply by the name of its product comparison publication brand
Which? - the body set up in 1957 by the activist, policymaker and
entrepreneur Michael Young (later Lord Young of Dartington), who
also invented the Open University. In 1963 the CA founded a research
arm, RICA, to undertake research to a high academic standard in an
eclectic mix of subject areas from estate agents to town planning. But
the body soon found itself focusing on the specific needs of elderly and
disabled consumers, a field that was to become its specialist area.

In the Seventies, RICA's work covered everything from medicines to
special footwear, invalid mobility vehicles and ground breaking
research into the sexual problems experienced by disabled people.
Then a series of 13 comparative test reports launched RICA's central
interest in the assessments of special equipment and mainstream
products through laboratory tests and assessments carried out by
disabled people, an interest which has carried through to today's digital
TV tests.

RICA continued to be managed by the CA until 1991 when it became a
fully independent product research and comparison charity known as
Ricability - pronounced 'Ry-ka-bility' - with its own board of trustees
and program of work. Through its trustees Ricability maintains a close
association with Which?, and the latter still provides part of
Ricability's core funding. The charity's other main source of funding is
the Department of Health, and it also receives money for specific
projects from various other companies, funds and organisations.

Recent Ricability reports -which are available online as well as in print
and audio CD or cassette - have included 'Stay in touch', examining
fixed and mobile telecoms equipment and services for older and
disabled customers; 'What's new', a guide to the latest home gadgets
and electrical goods for elderly and disabled people; and 'A guide to
buying a textphone', for deaf people and people with impaired hearing.
It will shortly be publishing reports on shopping trolleys and bath lifts.

In the area of consumer electronics, TV has been its strongest recent
focus. Digital television can enhance a person's viewing experience in
a number of ways, and new features such as Audio Description (AD)
can radically improve access to programmes by the visually impaired.
However the digital switchover will require many people to buy and
install new equipment; more channels mean more complex channel
navigation systems and more buttons on a remote control. Some set-top
boxes incorporate AD while others don't; on some the feature is easier
to use than others, some switch the feature off when the viewer
changes channel.

In 2005 Ricability won the commission from the then DTI (now
BERR) to carry out accessibility and usability testing on digital
television products in anticipation of the digital switchover (
http://www.ricability-digitaltv.org.uk/ ).

Since then the body has reviewed, recommended and produced
detailed reports for consumers on more than a hundred iDTVs, set-top
boxes, indoor aerials and digital television recorders. The government
commission was renewed in December and testing will continue until
at least 2009.

The 'ease of use' research is conducted for Ricability at the Milton
Keynes laboratory of Intertek RPT (
http://www.uk.intertek-etlsemko.com/),
a global leader in testing and certification of electrical products with
whom both Ricability and Which? have a longstanding relationship

This week Ricability and Digital UK have announced the launch of a
new badge that will be applied to digital television products to identify
those that are easiest to install (see News, this issue). Ricability has
also been consulted over product design, one example being the SKY
Digital remote control; information from testing is also fed back to the
manufacturers in order to assist them improve their future designs.

As everyday consumer products such as television sets converge with
more sophisticated information and computing devices, Ricability will
continue to offer a helping hand to people with disabilities in the
information age.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Focus
- Web Accessibility.

+10: The Power of Five.

The local government Society of IT Management (Socitm) this week
published a report on website accessibility which included a round-up
of the five most common accessibility errors.

The society estimates that these five errors account for 76% of all
website accessibility failures, and it asked Robin Christopherson, Head
of Accessibility Services at the charity AbilityNet, to describe their
impact. Robin is blind and uses the popular 'JAWS' screen reader
software to access the web.

An edited version of Robin's assessment follows.

"Common failure 1 is to have no alternative text for images.

"This is an extremely common occurrence. I visit a website and am
confronted with numerous unlabelled images. For mouse users this
'alternative text' is what pops up when you hover over the image. The
average web page has dozens of images, from photos and adverts to
'eye-candy' such as spacing graphics and design flourishes. Many of
these images are also clickable links or buttons, and not knowing what
these are makes navigation impossible. Imagine trying to drive from A
to B where the signposts at every roundabout or junction are blank. A
disaster!

"Every single image on a website should be properly labelled. You
don't need to begin captions by saying "Picture of.", as I already
know it's a picture. You don't need to label 'spacer' or 'eye-candy'
images (but give these a default caption so that the page still passes the
accessibility checkers) and, above all, make sure that all images that
are also links or buttons describe what will happen when you click on
them, eg alternative text as "Marilyn Monroe - click to read her life
story".

"As well as revolutionising the site for blind users, labelled images will
also help those with dyslexia and literacy difficulties who use text to
speech software (they hover their mouse over any text or image and the
content is spoken out). It will also help those with images turned off
(many hand-held users do not display images) and, last but by no
means least, Google loves labelled images.

"Common failure Two is the inappropriate use of JavaScript.

"JavaScript is used to write mini-programs that are embedded in web
pages and can enhance their functionality. They are very widely used
and set to increase dramatically with 'Web 2.0' applications.

"My screen reader (JAWS) is one of the most sophisticated, but there
are still many occasions when some uses of JavaScript leave me
confused or frustrated, roaming at length to discover what bit of the
page (if any) has changed after clicking that link, or finding that I am
totally unable to access that shopping cart as selecting that button using
the keyboard does nothing at all.

"It isn't enough to offer an alternative for those not using JavaScript,
thinking that disabled users do not have JavaScript switched on as a
matter of course. The vast majority of users of assistive technologies
(such as screen readers, voice recognition, magnification, alternative
keyboards and mice) can benefit from JavaScript functions as much as
anyone, with the major caveat that there are certain uses of JavaScript
that are not accessible to these technologies.

"The simple solution is to test your pages with these technologies to
ensure that your particular application of JavaScript is not problematic.

"Common failures 3 and 4 are errors in simple and complex data
tables.

"Thankfully, these days most websites use style sheets rather than
tables to style and arrange the blocks of content on a web page. Where
data tables are concerned, however, it is still the case that most are not
coded in such a way that the relevant headings are spoken by a screen
reader when moving from cell to cell. I hear '1327' and '1727' with no
idea of whether these are sales of widgets or notable dates in history.

"The solution is to make sure that all headings of columns and rows are
coded using the 'th' tag instead of the 'td' tag. A screen reader will
then announce these along with the contents of the cell, putting the data
in context (eg "Widgets sold in June, 1327").

"And finally, common failure 5 is the use of features with a lack of
accessible alternatives.

"Here you are confronted with an inaccessible bit of content or
function and you search for a way around the obstacle, but to no avail.
A classic example is 'CAPTCHA'. A CAPTCHA is a type of security
test used to determine whether the user is human (and so exclude
automated spamming programmes). A common type of CAPTCHA
requires that the user type the letters of a distorted image. Since the
image is by definition unlabelled (as otherwise it can be read by
malicious software) an alternative (such as an option to register by
phone or email) is essential.

"When it becomes clear that you have content or function that cannot
be made accessible, offer an accessible alternative. For example, the
Google accounts sign-up process that uses CAPTCHA also has a link
to an audio version of the code to be entered plus a link to contact
customer services for those who cannot access either the visual or the
auditory option.

"Always remember that an accessible site is a popular site - and not
just for the disabled community. Research has shown that a site that is
designed with accessibility in mind is also easier to use by all."

NOTE: 'A world denied: a supplement for Better connected 2008 on
website accessibility' is available from Socitm. It is free to subscribers
to the society's Insight programme; £50 for non-subscribers in the
public and voluntary sectors and £99 for private sector non-
subscribers.

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all
your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2008 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Reporter: Majeed Saleh
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey
Marketing Executive - Claire Clinton
Sales and Marketing - Jo Knell, Will Knox.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue 100 ends.] 
