+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 104, August 2008.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the
end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 104 Contents.

01: Beijing Games Website Inaccessible On Multiple Counts
- Research finds some improvements, but failure overall.

02: Mobile Browsing Barriers Linked To Accessibility
- World Wide Web Consortium publishes two working drafts.

03: Publishers Back Accessible Learning Materials Database
- Education IT agency chief explains student support system.

News in Brief: 04: Help Anywhere - Online screenreader; 05: Sports
Highlights - Paralympic YouTube channel; 06: One-Stop Trial -
charity pilots disability site.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Moodle Point - e-learning appeal; 08: Apple Support - Mac
community tips; 09: Further CAPTCHA - ongoing blog debate.

Section Three: Web Accessibility - Beijing Olympics.
10: Revisiting The Errors Of The Past: After the Sydney Olympics of
2000, a blind web user took successful legal action against the
organisers for creating an inaccessible website. Eight years on, little
seems to have been learned, writes Majeed Saleh.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: Designing for all: an inclusive approach to web,
print and electronic publishing
- A practical, one-day training course and document clinic
- Tuesday 16 September, Central London
http://www.headstar-training.com/dfa/

Trainer: Katie Grant, former publications manager, Disability Rights
Commission.

'Designing for all' is a practical seminar designed to introduce
organisations to the importance of designing accessible, easy to read
information for a range of different audiences including older people,
people with disabilities and people for whom English is not their first
language.

It will help you assess current design and content of information -
please bring examples to our document clinic - and follow an inclusive
model to improve accessibility across your communications mix.

The course will be of interest to anyone who is involved in the design
and delivery of information in print, electronic and web formats
including web content managers; content teams; marketing and
communications officers; and publications staff. To book a place see:
http://www.headstar-training.com/dfa/

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Beijing Games Website Inaccessible On Multiple Counts.

The website for the Beijing Olympics is not accessible to people with
disabilities, a leading accessibility expert has told E-Access Bulletin.

With the games in full swing this month, their official website which
include a full results service could be among the most visited sites in
the world (http://en.beijing2008.cn/). But Henny Swan, senior web
accessibility consultant at the RNIB, said the service is inaccessible in
a number of key ways.

"There are.no text alternatives for multimedia which means many
people, including mobile users, will be locked out of content. New
windows also seem to open from within Flash movies, which is not
only an accessibility but also a usability issue." Other findings include
instances of animation that fails to stop moving after three seconds, she
said. "This can be a distraction for people with reading problems or
people with low vision.

Last year Swan undertook an initial advance study of the accessibility
of the Beijing Olympics site, then still under development. While the
findings of her work were not all negative, the indications at that time
were that various improvements were needed before the website would
meet even the basic level of compliance with international Web
Content Accessibility Guideline.

Returning to the site this month, she said there had been some
improvements, although "where one issue may have been fixed, others
have taken its place." Overall her findings indicate that the organising
committee for the Beijing games seem not to have developed a clear
accessibility plan for the website.

Olympic websites have a mixed history in terms of accessibility. The
site for the 2004 games in Athens raised few complaints, but the
organisers of the 2000 Sydney Olympics were successfully sued for
failure to make their website comply with accessibility standards.

NOTE: For our full report on the accessibility of the Beijing 2008
Olympics website see section three, this issue.


+02: Mobile Browsing Barriers Linked To Accessibility.

Two new draft documents relating to accessibility and the future of the
web have been published in the past month the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C - http://www.w3.org/).

The first, 'Shared web experiences: barriers common to mobile device
users and people with disabilities', notes that many of the barriers
faced by internet browsers on mobile devices are the same as those
experienced by people with disabilities. The document provides
examples of the barriers of access to web content for both sets of users
(http://www.w3.org/WAI/mobile/experiences).

The second draft forms part of a series of guidelines from the
consortium's Web Accessibility Initiative, the 'Accessible Rich
Internet Applications suite', covering accessibility of advanced website
functionality for disabled users.

The draft provides an "abstract model" for accessible interfaces which
can be used to improve the accessibility and interoperability of web
content and applications (http://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria/).

W3C is the body which produces standards which govern the web,
including the main international measures for accessibility, the Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines. The consortium will now refine the
new drafts before publication in their final version.


+03: Publishers Back Accessible Learning Materials Database.

A web database helping UK education institutions to obtain learning
materials from publishing houses in accessible formats has been
launched by educational IT access agency TechDis.

TechDis is funded by JISC, the education sector's Joint Information
Systems Committee, to support the sector in achieving greater
technology inclusion. In an audio interview or 'podcast' published on
the JISC website, TechDis director Sal Cooke said the Publisher
Lookup UK service (http://www.publisherlookup.org.uk) had been
developed in partnership with the Publishers Association.

The website allows people to search an online database in which
publishers have entered a single point of contact for library staff or
other staff seeking to support students with learning difficulties to
obtain alternative formats. It is thought to be the first resource of its
kind in Europe, Cooke said, though a similar service already exists in
the US (http://www.publisherlookup.org/).

"It's been quite hard for library teams to be able to know who in a
publisher is the right person to speak to, how the library staff should
request their materials, is it reasonable to ask for example for a word
document, or what are the sorts of things they can ask for," Cooke said.

Help in accessing materials in different formats would not only benefit
people with learning difficulties or disabilities but a wide range of
other students such as those with different learning styles or those who
do not have English as first language and may prefer to listen to a text,
she said. The podcast can be accessed at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/jisc1 .


++ News in Brief:

+04: Help Anywhere: A free web-based screenreader that can be used
to browse the internet from any computer has been launched by
students at Washington State University. 'WebAnywhere' is designed
to help those using public PCs such as those in a library or internet
café; and people who cannot afford an expensive portable screen
reader. Visiting the website automatically loads the device and from
there users are able to browse to other sites:
http://webanywhere.cs.washington.edu/

+05: Sports Highlights: A YouTube channel has been created by the
International Paralympic Committee (IPC) to promote paralympic
sports. The channel will show a regularly updated selection of videos
from the IPC's internet television channel paralympicsport.tv, plus
daily updates from September's Paralympic Games in Beijing:
http://www.youtube.com/ParalympicSportTV

+06: One-Stop Trial: A trial one-stop-shop for disability related
information and advice on the web has been created by Leonard
Cheshire Disability, the largest voluntary sector provider of services to
disabled people in the UK. The Disability Information Portal (DIP) is
set to be launched in 2009, but a test phase is underway to enable
interested parties to help shape the site before it goes live:
http://www.dip-online.org/

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Fortune Cookie
- Web Sites That Really Work.

Fortune Cookie's dedicated web accessibility team makes sure that
everyone finds the web sites we design easy to use. As well as being
accessible, Fortune Cookie sites are beautiful and deliver stunning
return-on-investment. They're award-winning too. In 2007, our work
was nominated for major web design awards 11 times.

Legal & General, Kuoni, Diabetes UK, FT Business - just some of the
big name brands on Fortune Cookie's client list.

Every business can benefit from making its web site more accessible.
If you'd like to know what accessibility can do for your business, talk
to Fortune Cookie.

Visit our web site at:
http://www.fortunecookie.co.uk

Julie Howell is our Director of Accessibility. Email Julie at:
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: Moodle Point: Cheryl Edmonds, Executive Director of
CANnect.org, writes following our coverage of the accessibility work
on the popular Moodle open source e-learning platform (Issue 94,
October 2007).

She asks: "Do you know who is leading the charge around an
exemplary version of Moodle that has been tailored for vision loss
students? Is it Open University?

"Can you help me connect with others who are working to create a
Moodle experience for people with vision loss?"

[Answers please to inbox@headstar.com]


+08: Apple Support: Several readers wrote in to offer support to our
reader Estelita Clayton, who asked for tips on contacting other Apple
Mac users with impaired vision.

Mark Magennis of the Centre for Inclusive Technology in Ireland and
Craig F. Spurrell of BMO Financial Group both wrote in to
recommend the macvisionaries website as a good place to get in touch
with other blind Mac users, through a series of resources including
discussion lists.

The website is at:
http://www.macvisionaries.com/
And to join the lists, see:
http://www.macvisionaries.com/mailinglists.php

Estelita would like us to pass her thanks on to all those who responded.


+09: Further CAPTCHA: Discussion is still ongoing on our E-Access
Bulletin Live blog about the use of inaccessible 'CAPTCHA' anti-spam
tools by some websites.

Stuart Harrison of Lichfield District Council wrote: "We had loads of
problems with spam on our contact form - some of it quite offensive,
and, as some of it was going directly to frontline staff with
considerably thinner skin than me, I had to do something about it."

The solution Stuart came up with was not to use a traditional
CAPTCHA, but to use PHP to generate two numbers, one between 1
and 50, and another between 1 and 5, and ask users to write down the
total of the two added together when they submit the form.

"The second number of the first number never goes beyond 5, so the
sum's answer never goes beyond the next 10 digit range (to make the
sum easier)", he says. "This is all wrapped in a label, so screenreader
users can see the link between the question and the form, and I've
never had another bit of spam since!

"The only thing that worries me is that this might lock out users with
poor numeracy - am I being too cautious? Here's the form for
reference":
http://www.lichfielddc.gov.uk/site/custom_scripts/feedback2.php

Henry French from Access Journal at RNIB responds: "Should the
whole idea of CAPTCHAs as a concept be abandoned? It seems that
few web designers know about alternatives, especially for blind and
partially sighted people. But even if we attempt to educate more
designers about alternative CAPTCHAs, is spam software not going to
soon improve to the point that it is too smart for CAPTCHAs anyway?

"My understanding has always been.that the standard CAPTCHA -
obscure letters on a busy background - was introduced to beat software
that could read standard text and 'know' how to fill in a form based on
replicating a piece of text. This is why web designers do not use alt text
tags - the same software could read that alt text and fill in a form.

"But I thought that artificial intelligence was moving forward quickly,
including in the abilities of programs to understand images and audio.
Stuart above seems to have found a good idea, but I wonder whether
programs will soon be able to 'think' around this solution, or failing
that, bombard developers like him with every potential solution to a
question CAPTCHA.

"Am I being crazily futuristic? Or should we look forward to a future
in which we are all - regardless of ability to interact with CAPTCHAs -
left waiting for hours or days for a human to authenticate online forms?
I could ask if there will be programs in the future which forge online
forms and then interact with authenticators, over the phone for
example. But that's crazy talk."

To join the discussion, see our 'E-Access Bulletin Live' blog:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=183#comments
We will track further comments in this section of the newsletter.

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three: Web Accessibility
- Beijing Olympics.

+10: Revisiting The Errors Of The Past
by Majeed Saleh.

The Olympic Games are currently being followed avidly by sports
fans, journalists and politicians worldwide, many of them using the
official Beijing 2008 website (http://en.beijing2008.cn/), the most
comprehensive source of information on events.

Given the huge global interest the Olympics always stimulates, the
demands and expectations on the Games website are high, and
designing a site to please everyone is always going to be tough. Where
accessibility for people with disabilities is concerned, however,
previous organisers have not always got it right.

In one of the most celebrated legal cases ever to take place in any
nation concerned with web accessibility, Bruce Maguire, a blind
Australian web user, successfully sued the organisers of the 2000
Sydney Games for not only failing to produce an accessible website
but for refusing to make the changes required that would have enabled
him and other blind users to use the website.

In a damning indictment, the Australian Human Right and Equal
Opportunities Commission said the Sydney Games organising
committee SOCOG "never seriously considered the issue and only
when the hearing was imminent did it attempt to support its rejection
of the complainant's complaint by resort to a process which was both
inadequate and unconvincing." The committee was ordered to pay
Maguire 20,000 Australian Dollars (for our reports on this important
case see E-Access Bulletins issues 9-11, September to November
2000; plus issue 17, May 2001. These is a also an excellent report on
the affair on web access expert Joe Clark's archive website at
http://contenu.nu/socog.html ).

Four years later, with the Greek organisers eager not to fall into the
same trap, the site for the 2004 games in Athens was designed with
accessibility to the fore, and few complaints were raised. But now the
spotlight has turned on China, and the signs are that the Beijing
organisers have taken a less thorough approach, and failed to heed the
lessons of the past.

Last year Henny Swan, senior web accessibility consultant at the
RNIB, conducted an initial study of the accessibility of the official
Beijing Olympics website. At the time the site was far from reaching
its final state and while the signs for accessibility were not all bad, the
indications were that a range of improvements would be needed before
the site would meet even the basic level of compliance with the
international Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0.

Among the positives picked up last year, Swan cited an attempt to
provide ALT text to images and a fairly logical heading structure. But
the site also displayed many accessibility failures such as overuse of
animated images; some missing ALT text; lack of alternatives for
multimedia; inadequately described links, for example using just the
one word 'more'; poor mark-up of data tables; inaccessible animated
Flash objects; fixed font sizes;  and extensive use of JavaScript without
alternatives (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/beijing1 ).

So how far has the site been improved in the intervening period?

Swan told E-Access Bulletin this week that, in the year since her initial
assessment of the site, some of these issues have been corrected. For
example, it is now possible to adjust the font size on pages. However,
she said: "where one issue may have been fixed, others have taken its
place."

"There is still a lot of animation that fails to stop moving after three
seconds," she said. "This can be a distraction for people with reading
problems or people with low vision. There are still no text alternatives
for multimedia which means many people, including mobile users, will
be locked out of content. New windows also seem to open from within
Flash movies, which is not only an accessibility but also a usability
issue."

These issues could have a wider impact than the restriction of access
for people with disabilities, Swan said. "Many of the issues that
adversely affect people with disabilities also affect many other users
such as mobile users, users on dial up or older browsers. Had
accessibility advice been followed the site would have opened up to
significantly more people."

There are signs that the Beijing organising committee, BOCOG, may
have concluded that web accessibility would not be as much of an
issue for the Olympic Games as for the Paralympics, which are set to
take place from 6 to 17 September. Though neither site has an
accessibility statement, unlike the website for the Olympics the website
for the Paralympics does claim in press releases to have been designed
according to international accessibility guidelines, and the site is
visibly more simply designed (
http://en.paralympic.beijing2008.cn/ ).

In July a press release on the Paralympics site
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/para1) announced that China's Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology and the Ministry of Science and
Technology had launched some 'improvements' to both the official
BOCOG site (http://en.olympic.cn/) and the website of the Chinese
Disabled Persons Federation (http://www.cdpf.org.cn/english/).

According to the press release - these modifications include automatic
text resizing; an automatic sign language system for deaf users; and a
free 'speech broadcasting' system in English and Chinese.

Attempts to find out more about the 'speech broadcasting' features
meet with confused and patchy results, however. There is no sign of
this system on the front page of the Beijing2008 site or indeed any of
the other official English language Olympics sites, including the
BOCOG site mentioned in the press release, nor does it materialise in
any site search of the Olympic pages.

The Chinese Disabled Persons Federation, which was mentioned in the
same release, does have a 'voice' link at the top of its page which takes
to the user to stripped down version of the site and reads out text using
the mouse pointer. However this body has no obvious connection with
the Olympics and it is unclear why it was mentioned at all.

There is a link to a different 'Easy Web Browsing' (EWB) system
through a banner advertisement on the Paralympics website
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/beijing2). This section tells users that the
system is designed to help the illiterate, visually impaired, elderly,
those with learning difficulties and those not used to computers. The
system can speak in several languages including Chinese, Japanese,
French, English, German, Portuguese, Spanish, and Italian and is able
to detect the language of the page automatically.

However the EWB does not quite live up to its name. To use the
system, the user must download a programme which only works with
Microsoft Internet Explorer.

To operate it the user must move his or her mouse pointer over a
paragraph of text which is then magnified and read aloud. However,
the program stops reading at the end of each paragraph and to continue
to the next paragraph the user must reposition the mouse. Such a
system could not benefit somebody unable to effectively operate a
mouse, including blind people and those with poor motor control.

Overall, Swan said it seems likely that BOCOG did not produce a clear
accessibility plan for the website. "It is disappointing that lessons from
the legal case against the Sydney Olympic website have not been
learned."

[Section Three ends].

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all
your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2008 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Reporter: Majeed Saleh
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey
Marketing Executive - Claire Clinton

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue 104 ends.]

