+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 98, FEBRUARY 2008.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the
end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 98 Contents.

01: Work Begins on British Standard for Accessible Websites
- Exclusive: technical committee formed to develop guidance.

02: Public Bodies 'Face Assistive Technology Legal Action'
- Analyst warns organisations can no longer afford not to act.

03: Kurzweil Unveils Smallest Text Scanner and Converter
- mobile phone camera and software allows portable text recognition.

News in Brief: 04: Audio Awareness - TV description campaign; 05:
Better Accessed - council websites supplement; 06: Checker List - free
online accessibility tester tools.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Flash Encouragement - Adobe urged to educate developers; 08:
Poor Show - employers criticised over pdf implementation; 09:
Leopard Displays - Apple and Braille.

Section Three: News Analysis - Web Accessibility Standards.
10: Raising the Standard: The British Standards Institution is to move
towards development of a full British Standard for the development of
accessible websites, E-Access Bulletin has learned. Dan Jellinek
interviews Julie Howell, the driving force behind the project.

Section Four: Conference Report - Dyslexia and the Civil Service.
11: Premonitions of Judgment Day: Dyslexia is a problem for many
people, and employers must act to ensure their staff have the assistive
technology they need. If they do not they could fall foul of the courts
sooner rather than later, since the evidence of what helps is now
widespread and the solutions are low-cost, the conference heard.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: E-Access '08
- The Accessibility Event of the Year
- 23 April, Central London
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess08/

E-Access Bulletin's fourth annual conference and exhibition on access
to technology by people with disabilities is on 23 April, sponsored by
Fortune Cookie and supported by E-Access Bulletin, RNIB and Ability
Magazine.

A fantastic line-up will look at issues surrounding access to the web; e-
learning and education; digital TV switchover; accessible books; and
employment issues. This is the place for all organisations in all sectors
to find out how to comply with the law and how to make the best use
of the talents of all your staff, students and service users.

Delegate rates are just £195 for public sector, £295 for private sector
and £165 for small charities and non-profits (turnover under £150k).
Book today to guarantee your place, at:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess08/

And for information about sponsoring or exhibiting please email Will
Knox on:
will.knox@headstar.com or call him on 01273 267974.

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Work Begins on British Standard for Accessible Websites.

Work has begun on the development of a full British Standard for
developing accessible websites, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

The move follows the publication by the British Standards Institution
(BSi) in March 2006 of initial guidance known as a 'PAS' or 'Publicly
Available Specification'. This was 'PAS 78: a guide to good practice
in commissioning accessible websites'.

A new technical committee IST/45 is now being assembled to oversee
the development of a full standard, of which the chair elect is PAS78
lead author Julie Howell, former RNIB digital access campaigner and
currently head of accessibility at the digital agency Fortune Cookie.
Other members of the committee are likely to be drawn from
organisations represented on the PAS78 steering group such as the
British Computer Society; Cabinet Office; and the former Disability
Rights Commission (DRC), now part of the Equality and Human
Rights Commission.

When finished, the British Standard will be available for purchase from
the BSi at a price comparable with other standards, usually between
£30 and £100. PAS78 was made available for free download by DRC,
which sponsored its development and bought a distribution licence,
though this type of arrangement is not possible for full standards. The
PAS has been downloaded more than 54,000 times to date.

The new standard will relate to procurement or development of
accessible websites. It will not set out the technical requirements of
accessibility, but will outline a process developers can follow to ensure
they are taking all the right actions to make their websites and services
as inclusive as possible. In an exclusive interview with E-Access
Bulletin published in this issue, Julie Howell says BSi would like the
standard to be based on PAS78 but she is also keen to widen it to
embrace some of the new types of web service such as social
networking. Other issues to be revisited from the PAS include the need
for user testing of websites by disabled people; and the need for
organisations to produce an accessibility policy.

The standard is likely to be published in the first quarter of 2009,
Howell says, and the committee IST/45 could eventually produce other
work such as leaflets and training materials, some of which might be
made available without charge.

NOTE: For the full interview with Julie Howell see Section Three, this
issue.


+02: Public Bodies 'Face Assistive Technology Legal Action'.

An increasing amount of research showing that large numbers of staff
with dyslexia and other disabilities can benefit from assistive
technology mean that public sector bodies face the likelihood of legal
action this year or next under the Disability Discrimination Act, a
leading analyst said this month.

David Evans, Education development manager at computer access firm
Microlink PC (http://www.microlinkpc.co.uk/), told the Dyslexia and
the Civil Service conference in London that research carried out by his
company in schools had found that some 28% of pupils could benefit
from assistive software.

A large amount of similar research, coupled with ever-falling costs of
assistive technologies such as screen filters, text to speech and voice
recognition tools, mean it is only a matter of time before public sector
employers are forced to implement assistive technology through legal
action, Evans said.

Under the terms of the Disability Discrimination Act public sector
employers must make "reasonable" adjustments to facilities to allow
access by all staff, he said. "So what information is available to
employers at the moment? We know at least 10% of the workforce is
dyslexic. We know there is a truckload of technology out there that can
help, for probably less than 1% of the employment costs of the
individual. So the information is there, it is public knowledge, the
resources are there and they know people will benefit.

"So the judge will say - yes, that was reasonable, why wasn't it done?
There are going to be some landmark cases, this year or next year."

NOTE: For a full conference report see Section Four, this issue.


+03: Kurzweil Unveils Smallest Text Scanner and Converter.

The smallest ever portable device allowing users to scan printed text
and convert it to speech has been unveiled by KNFB Reading
Technology. The KNFB Reader uses software installed on a Nokia
N82 multi-function mobile phone handset weighing only 114 grams
(http://www.knfbreader.com/).

The device allows users to take pictures of printed materials using the
phone's integrated camera while the KNFB software, which includes
intelligent imaging and character recognition, allows the text to be
resized, tracked and highlighted on-screen or converted into synthetic
speech. In addition the screen reader software can help a visually
impaired user to access more of the phone's features which include a
calendar, internet access, music player, voice recorder, GPS navigation
and PDF viewer.

KNFB is a partnership of the National Federation of the Blind in the
US and Kurzweil Technologies, the company set up by celebrated
inventor and futurologist Raymond Kurzweil, pioneer of Optical
Character Recognition and text-to-speech technology in the 1970s.

The software is available in the UK for 1,080 pounds, with a package
including software, a Nokia handset and half a day of training available
for 1,725 pounds.

In May Kurzweil will be further enhancing his reputation as a man of
the future when he appears as an interactive hologram to be the
keynote speaker at a charity dinner. The Children's Vision Awards
Dinner is organised by the Association for Retinopathy of Prematurity
and Related Diseases (http://www.ropard.org/) and Kurzweil's
hologram will use 'digital teleportation' technology developed by
Teleportec (http://www.teleportec.com/).


++News in Brief:

+04: Audio Awareness: A publicity campaign to raise awareness of
audio description services for television programmes is being launched
this month by RNIB. The ads will highlight the benefits that audio
description can provide to visually impaired people and the increasing
availability of the services on digital TV. In addition a new symbol has
been created for broadcasters and retailers which will make audio
description services easier to identify. The series of adverts will run for
six weeks, reaching 80% of the UK population:
http://www.audiodescription.org.uk/ .

+05: Better Accessed: A new supplement on accessibility will be
published alongside March's annual 'Better Connected' report on the
state of UK council websites, from the local government Society of IT
Management. The report - now in its tenth year -has always covered
accessibility but growing awareness of the complexity of these issues
has prompted the decision to publish an in-depth supplement:
http://www.socitm.gov.uk .

+06: Checker List: A list of 25 free online website accessibility
checkers has been posted online at the blog Virtualhosting.com:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/vh1 .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: The Age Agenda Conference 2008
- The complete picture on public policy and older people
- Tuesday 26 February 2008, London, W1

Age Concern England's annual conference provides an overview of the
policies affecting older people today. Chaired by Angela Rippon, the
conference features an impressive line up of speakers including three
government ministers: Ivan Lewis MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary
of State for Care Services; Mike O'Brien MP, Minister of State for
Pensions Reform and Baroness Andrews, Parliamentary Under-
Secretary of State.

Other plenary speakers include David Willets MP, Baroness Sally
Greengross, Equality and Human Rights Commission, Katie Ghose,
British Institute of Human Rights and Andrew Haldenby, Reform.

For a full programme and booking details please visit:
www.ageconcern.org.uk/ageagendaconference .

[Sponsored notice ends].


++Sponsored notice: Access by Design Journal
- National Register of Access Consultants (NRAC) Spring Conference.

The National Register of Access Consultants (NRAC) is holding its
Spring Conference on 12 March 2008 at the Lowry, Manchester.
Topics under discussion include:

- How to get listed building consent;
- Changing Places;
- Regulatory Reform (Fire Safety) Order and meeting the needs of
disabled people;
- The difficulties in establishing the law relating to disability
discrimination;
- Design of Home Zones as researched by DPTAC;
- An update from the Equalities and Human Rights Commission (tbc).

For a full conference overview, and to book a place, visit the NRAC
website at:
http://www.nrac.org.uk .

[Sponsored notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Flash Encouragement: Julie Howell, Director of Accessibility at
Fortune Cookie (and interviewee elsewhere in this issue of E-Access
Bulletin for her work on a British Standard for developing accessible
websites), writes in with feedback on last month's articles on the
accessibility of Adobe Flash web multimedia technology. She says:
"Your report on accessible Flash was extremely encouraging. Many of
us remember the days when a Flash site was an inaccessible site.

"But how many Flash developers are aware that they can make the
Flash they code more accessible? For its efforts to produce real
success, Adobe must invest energy in educating web developers in how
to create accessible Flash.

"I also hope that Adobe will do more outreach with blind and partially
sighted web users, many of whom remember the dark days of Flash
only too well and who will need a bit of encouragement (training and
persuasion!) to give it another go. I've lost count of the number of
times I've heard blind web users say 'That site's not accessible to me
because it's in Flash,' without actually trying to access it.

"The stigma that still surrounds Flash must be challenged. I hope
Adobe will extend its outreach activities beyond Techshare, so blind
and partially sighted people will understand that a Flash site can be an
accessible site.

"Adobe's accessibility heroes (Andrew Kirkpatrick and Greg Pisocky)
are based in the USA. Perhaps Adobe should consider recruiting an
outreach person for the UK and Europe. Even a short burst of effort
would help to bring all those who live in 'Flash accessibility limbo' up
to speed.

"The hard work of making Flash accessible has been done. The task
before Adobe now is in encouraging blind and partially sighted people
to use it: a win for Adobe, a win for Flash developers, a win for any
company that has a Flash web site and a win for blind and partially
sighted web users."

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com].


+08: Poor Show: Also on the topic of Flash, Jude DaShiell, a computer
programmer in the US civil service from Lexington Park, Maryland,
had an indignant reaction: "No! At least not the way it gets
implemented by whoever prepares mandatory training using it for my
employer. So far there's one persistent problem. Buttons you have to
click on keep getting put on slides. Screen readers see these slides as
single graphic objects so it takes sighted assistance to do the clicking
whenever this happens.

"My employer is now using alternative media solutions for
presentations for screen reader users the problem is so bad. What
they're using are pdf files but at least you can get the text extracted out
of that trash then delete those files. My employer continues guzzling
that Adobe Kool-Aid though and until that stops and the employer
figures out how to prise its data out of the forms it used it's going to
continue losing the taxpayer's money. But after all who cares so long
as it's the taxpayer's money not management's salaries that get lost?"

[Editor's note: for non-US readers, Jude's reference to 'guzzling that
Kool-Aid' adapts the American expression, 'drinking the Kool-Aid',
meaning to blindly following a belief.]

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: Leopard Displays: Our tireless correspondent, Jude DaShiell, has
also written in this month to continue our discussion about support for
refreshable Braille displays by the new Apple operating system
'Leopard'.

Jude provides a link to a list of supported displays, from Apple's own
website:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/apple1 .

And Jude also forwarded a relevant notice from earlier this month:

"Today, Apple released the Braille Display Update 1.0 for VoiceOver
in Leopard. VoiceOver, part of the Universal Access family of
accessibility tech, allows blind or visually impaired users to hear
what's on the screen. Via the new update, when you connect a
compatible Braille display, "VoiceOver automatically detects it and
sends it information about what is displayed on the screen."

"This update adds new support for certain Braille displays, including
the HandyTech Braille Star 8, GW Micro BrailleSense, and more. This
update is available for users of Mac OS X Leopard by using Software
Update (Apple menu > Software Update) or by downloading the
installer package from the Apple support downloads site. If you're
currently using a Braille screenreader under Leopard - or you were
waiting for support for your screenreader via this update - drop us a
comment to let us know if the update makes a difference for you."

The download is available at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/apple2 .

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Inbox ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Fortune Cookie
- Web Sites That Really Work.

Fortune Cookie's dedicated web accessibility team makes sure that
everyone finds the web sites we design easy to use. As well as being
accessible, Fortune Cookie sites are beautiful and deliver stunning
return-on-investment. They're award-winning too. In 2007, our work
was nominated for major web design awards 11 times.

Legal & General, Kuoni, Diabetes UK, FT Business - just some of the
big name brands on Fortune Cookie's client list.

Every business can benefit from making its web site more accessible.
If you'd like to know what accessibility can do for your business, talk
to Fortune Cookie.

Visit our web site at:
http://www.fortunecookie.co.uk

Julie Howell is our Director of Accessibility. Email Julie at:
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Sponsored Notice:
- The British Computer Association of the Blind.

The British Computer Association of the Blind (BCAB) is a committed
organisation that focuses on computer related issues for visually
impaired people of all skill levels and interests. Our membership
ranges from computer professionals working in the field, to people
taking their first steps in computing.

We offer training, discussion, help and support on a variety of
computer related topics. With four different membership packages to
choose from and a growing choice of member benefits,  there's
something to suit everyone. Visit our website for more information or
to join online:
http://www.bcab.org.uk/ .

[Sponsored notice ends].


++Section Three: News Analysis
- Web Accessibility Standards.

+10: Raising the Standard
by Dan Jellinek.

Although awareness of the importance of web accessibility is now
relatively high after years of struggle by disability campaigners,
website owners and developers still face a confusing task in trying to
ascertain exactly what they should do to make their sites accessible.

There are a variety of guidelines and standards, and the main
recognised international standard, the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG) from the World Wide Web Consortium's Web
Accessibility Initiative (WAI), is now outdated. A new version -
WCAG 2.0 - might appear next year, but no-one is holding their breath
since already almost a decade of wrangling and delays has passed since
the appearance of WCAG version 1.0.

Into this minefield strides the British Standards Institution (BSi), the
UK's national standards body, now in the process of establishing a new
technical standards committee to oversee the development of a
standard which all organisations will be able to follow in procuring or
developing an accessible website. It will not in itself set out in detail
the technical requirements of accessibility, but it will aim to outline a
thorough process developers can follow to ensure they are taking all
the right actions at the right time to make their websites and services as
inclusive as possible.

The work will build on BSi's existing 'PAS 78', where 'PAS' stands
for 'Publicly Available Specification'. A PAS is an initial
specification, developed in a consultative manner, which marks the
first step on the way to a full British Standard, and indeed many
members of the team which developed the PAS for BSi will join the
new technical committee. Chief among these is Julie Howell, head of
accessibility at web design agency Fortune Cookie and long-term web
accessibility campaigner on behalf of RNIB and others. Howell drafted
PAS 78 and is chair elect of the new technical committee 'IST/45'.

The work will be the culmination of almost a decade of hard work,
Howell told E-Access Bulletin in an exclusive interview to announce
the new project.

"The story starts back in 1999, when four things happened," Howell
says. "WAI published the first draft of the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines; the UK government published its white paper
'Modernising government', with targets for moving public services
online; I was appointed internet campaigns officer at RNIB; and Part
III of the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) came into force, which
extended the act's provisions to services and service providers,
including websites.

"So there was quite a lot going on: noise was being made in Whitehall,
things were starting to happen."

The work was taken up by the UK's then Disability Rights
Commission - now part of the expanded Equality and Human Rights
Commission - which issued a code of practice on the DDA in 2002
expanding on its application to websites and then, in 2004, launched a
formal investigation into web accessibility in the UK.

The commission engaged City University to undertake research into
1,000 UK websites, published later that same year as 'Disabled people
and the web'. The research found that only 19% of websites met level
'A' of WCAG 1.0, says Howell, and that a significant percentage of
problems experienced by disabled people could not be met by WCAG.

"Through the research the commission found there was a gap - that
there was a high level of goodwill to people with disabilities, but a
failure to act," she says. In all the report made 16 recommendations, of
which one was the production of new guidance to bridge a gap in
understanding.

"Another was to launch a public awareness campaign, which it never
has," she says.

It was in relation to the recommendation on guidance that DRC was
approached by BSi, which said it had a product and a process that
could help. The results was that DRC sponsored the process of creating
PAS78 - a PAS is always sponsored, though full standards are funded
and owned by BSi itself - and the commission turned to Howell for
advice and support in forming a steering group and drawing up the
specification.

"A PAS is part way on the journey to a standard, but it does not require
consensus, so it can be published quickly," Howell says. "It was
consultative, we consulted with a wide range of stakeholders, but did
not require consensus like the WCAG revision process, so it was
possible to produce within a year."

To begin with, Howell had to assess what role the PAS would play in a
field where guidelines already existed. "I was the one with a blank
sheet of paper, who decided what it should include. BSi and DRC had
drawn up the scope, but the steering group changed it, because it had
been intended for developers, and it became obvious to us that we
already had technical guidelines - WCAG - and what was needed was
guidance on procurement."

As the PAS was developed - and there were strict BSi rules to be
followed, including the Kafkaesque BS0, the standard for writing
standards - it was redrafted twice by a steering group which had
representation from a variety of organisations: AbilityNet; BBC;
British Computer Society; Cabinet Office; DRC; IBM; RNIB;
Tesco.com; University College London; and the Usability
Professionals Association.

At the end of this process, it set out a robust generic process for
creating an accessible site, emphasising site testing by disabled people;
the need for organisations to produce an accessibility policy for
internal use; and publication of an accessibility statement on each
website site for the benefit of users with disabilities.

After a wider consultation process with more than 100 stakeholder
organisations such as Adobe and WAI, the PAS was launched in
March 2006. Although the specification was made available by BSi for
a £30 download charge, DRC bought a licence for open publication so
the PAS could be made available for free public download from its
own website (now the website if its successor body, the Equality and
Human Rights Commission), resulting in a rush of interest that has led
to download figures of some 54,000 to date.

BSi rules state that after two years a PAS has to be reviewed with a
view to becoming a full standard, though Howell says that at first,
when this deadline was approaching and the institution contacted her
with the next step in mind, she and her fellow committee members
were not sure if the time was yet right to move towards a full standard.

"With the two-year mark is approaching, at first we were resistant to
talk of it becoming a standard. I felt not enough had been done when
the PAS was published to promote awareness of it. To have 54,000
downloads is not bad, but my fear was that we had released something
that had been downloaded and that was all. It was not necessarily being
used.

"On the other hand, with a PAS you always have to explain to
everyone what a PAS is, whereas people have heard of a British
Standard. So I was persuaded, but at the same time daunted - while the
creation of a PAS does not require full consensus, a BS does. There is
an awful lot of work to be done."

The fledgling new committee IST/45 will be charged with looking at
the area of web accessibility in general, including e-commerce and
social networking sites, with other work beyond the initial BS also
possible, Howell says. "There might also be leaflets and training
materials." She is currently in the process of finalising initial
membership of the committee, with representation confirmed from
many of the bodies involved with drawing up PAS 78, and others
invited. Further members will be co-opted to advise the committee on
an ad-hoc basis as its work progresses, Howell says.

But the committee's chief task, and its first piece of work, will be to
draw up the British Standard. Initially to be drafted by a sub-group of a
few committee members, Howell says BSi would like the standard to
be based on PAS78 but she is also keen to widen it to embrace some of
the new types of web service that were not around just a couple of
years ago when the PAS was drawn up.

"PAS78 was before Web 2.0, before social networks, before rich
internet applications. We will have to look at these."

As with all British Standards, the completed standard will be wholly
owned by BSi, and therefore, unlike with the DRC-sponsored PAS78,
there will be a price attached to it, Howell says. But it will be aimed at
a fairly specialised, professional audience who should be able to afford
the price, and the committee will also be likely to produce other more
general materials that might be free, such as additional documentation
and training.

The committee's aim is to get the BS out within a year - in the first
quarter of 2009 - a far swifter process than the seemingly endless
debate over the creation of WCAG 2.0.

"We've all agreed this has to be fast - I don't want it to be so
collaborative and consultative that it takes a decade," Howell says.
"BSi will not let it drag on, and I will not let it drag on. I am a
disability campaigner. I want to see change."

NOTE: For more information on the work of the new BSi technical
committee, readers may contact Julie Howell on
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk . Julie will also be speaking at
Headstar's annual event E-Access '08, on 23 April in central London:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess08 .

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four: Conference Report
- Dyslexia and the Civil Service.

+11: Premonitions of Judgment Day
by Dan Jellinek.

It is impossible to state a definitive number for the percentage of
people who suffer from dyslexia because there is no single definition
of dyslexia, delegates heard at this month's conference on Dyslexia
and the Civil Service.

"It is a spectrum, a continuum," Rachel Davies, National Institute of
Adult Continuing Education (NIACE), told the conference, hosted by
the Adult Dyslexia Organisation.

"If you set the bar low, 40% may have some indications, but the most
commonly quoted figures are around 4% for severe dyslexia and
around 10% for mild and severe dyslexia," Davies said.

"But it's also important to remember that lots of people who don't
have dyslexia will find the adjustments that you make useful."

David Evans, Education development manager at specialist computer
access firm Microlink PC (http://www.microlinkpc.co.uk/), said some
74% of disability recorded in the UK is dyslexia-related, making
dyslexia by far the biggest single disability issue.

Evans said that research carried out by his company in schools had
found that the average take-up of software designed to help people
with dyslexia was around 28% of pupils per day. "I don't know if it
was the same 28% - we will test for that next time - so the true figure
of total pupils helped could be even higher. But schools actually only
budget for about 4% of pupils who need assistance."

Other factors which could increase the number of people benefiting
from software designed to help people with dyslexia include people
with English as their second language (about 18% of entrants to the
workforce, many of these suffering from dyslexia in their own
language as well); attention deficit disorder sufferers; people with
impaired vision; and people who prefer to learn in a more visual way.

"My inclination is that the true proportion of people who could be
helped by access software is probably closer to 40%," Evans said. "But
even if we accept that only approximately 10% of the UK workforce
can understand and present data much more quickly than they can read
or write, it is clear that much talent is being wasted."

One practical definition of dyslexia is simply the condition whereby
people are able to understand spoken information faster than they are
able to absorb it through reading or set it down in writing, he said. I
know one extremely bright individual at Cardiff university who will
get a first class degree, got three As at 'A' level, and can mentally
process around 700 words a minute, but can only manage six words a
minute reading, and even less writing. The average for dyslexia is
around 20 words a minute.

"But we can harness technology to enable people to access data at a
speed which reflects their ability to process and absorb it," Evans said.
"Technology can help get data into your mind, and out of your head
and onto paper, at speed."

Low-cost solutions that can help people with dyslexia use computers
include colour overlays to alter the colour and contrast of text and
background. "The difference they can make is stunning", Evans said.
"A digital one is free, if you want it profiled it is still very cheap."

Text to speech software including screen-readers has also become
cheaper, better quality and easier to use in the past few years, he said.
And voice recognition software, which can be of enormous assistance
to people with dyslexia as well as those with impaired vision, has taken
a giant leap forwards with the latest version of 'Dragon' software.

"When Dragon version 9 came out it was as if we had jumped from
version 8 to version 80 - it now has 90% accuracy. It actually works
better the faster you talk," Evans said. "Its processing power is
awesome, though it needs a good computer to use it. At around £120
for the basic version, it's affordable, and it can be used with digital
note-takers such as the Olympus DS-40. I'm not dyslexic, but I use it
every day."

Other software tools that can be useful include 'mind-mapping' tools
that help portray ideas and build documents in 3-D visual diagrams
rather than as linear notes. "Some of the new mind-mapping tools are
fantastic, and they can convert back to a nice linear structure at the
press of a button," he said. "And they are not as conspicuous for
someone to use as a screen-reader, it is not as obvious that they have a
disability."

With all these low-cost technology options available and a growing
body of research showing how many people could benefit, it is only a
matter of time before more employers are forced to implement far
more technology through legal action, Evans said.

Under the terms of the Disability Discrimination Act public sector
employers must make "reasonable" adjustments to facilities to allow
access by all staff. "What is 'reasonable adjustment'? The reactive
definition in common law is retrospective - it is what a judge believes
was reasonable given the circumstances and the information that was
available," Evans said. "So what information is available to employers
at the moment? We know at least 10% of the workforce is dyslexic.
We know there is a truckload of technology out there that can help, for
probably less than 1% of the employment costs of the individual. So
the information is there, it is public knowledge, the resources are there
and they know people will benefit.

"So the judge will say - yes, that was reasonable, why wasn't it done?
There are going to be some landmark cases, this year or next year."

Some public bodies may say that the money to make adjustments is not
there in their budgets, but they could go and bid for it from the centre.

"There must be a cost-benefit analysis, could be technology for £100
that increases productivity by 20%. It will only take a strong test case
to change people's attitudes."

Ultimately, the strongest reason for employers and educational
institutions to start to make wider use of assistive technology is not
simply to avoid legal action or to comply with regulations but to make
the best use of their employees' or learners' talent, improving their
productivity, Evans said.

"In my experience, more than 90% of assessments in the workplace are
compliance driven. It wasn't 'how can we harness this person's talent?'
It was 'How quickly can we tick a box?'"

But being 'employee-centred' does not just mean reacting to individual
problems, he said. "An individual-centred approach is not about
compliance, employers should be saying 'We ought to do this, because
we will get more from our staff. It is active talent management."

In a lot of organisations, it will be a lot easier to take a decision based
on this kind of high level approach, he said. Research from the
University of Southampton has identified that nearly 90% of people
using assistive technologies reported an improvement in their
performance. "Go back to your unions, begin to ask questions."

As part of his session, Evans told the story of one 15-year-old student
whose experiences were both inspirational and sobering. "I was there
at a school and we were doing some testing with screen filters and this
boy just went mad. He went crazy, we had to pull him down off the
ceiling. But he wasn't angry because it didn't work - he was angry
because a free colour contrast tool did work, and it was so easy After
20 minutes of using it, he could read.

"And he said, why has it taken so long to find this? He was angry at the
time that had been wasted."

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all
your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2008 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Reporter: Majeed Saleh
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey
Marketing Executive - Claire Clinton
Sales and Marketing - Jo Knell, Will Knox.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue 98 ends.] 
