+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 103, July 2008.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the
end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN)
Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 103 Contents.

01: British Standard for Web Access 'Aimed At Marketers'
- Guidelines to offer non-technical help to retailers and corporations.

02: Charity Launches Manifesto for Digital Inclusion
- Advice on how to reach society's 'struggling seventh'.

03: Disability Body Blasts EU anti-discrimination draft
- Proposed directive fails to push accessibility standards.

News in Brief: 04: Inclusive toolkit - international resource; 05: Social
Fix - web access tool; 06: Employer's Erratum - correction from last
issue.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: CAPTCHA Continues - anti-spam tools debate; 08: Tag Precision -
web image attributes; 09: VoiceOver Buddies - Apple advice sought.

Section Three: News Focus - Public Sector Web Accessibility
Guidelines.
10: Buried Sticks And Mixed Messages: The government has
published guidelines on accessibility of public sector websites, which
toughen up requirements to 'AA' level. But how easy are the new rules
to understand, and what happens to bodies that disobey them? Dan
Jellinek reports.

++Section Four: Opinion - Digital Inclusion Manifesto.
11: Helping Hand For The 'Struggling Seventh': The consultancy
humanITy has published a blueprint to help the most disadvantaged
section of UK society gain more of the benefits of the information age.
We publish an edited summary.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: Designing for all: an inclusive approach to web,
print and electronic publishing
- A practical, one-day training course and document clinic
- Tuesday 16 September, Central London
http://www.headstar-training.com/dfa/

Trainer: Katie Grant, former publications manager, Disability Rights
Commission.

'Designing for all' is a practical seminar designed to introduce
organisations to the importance of designing accessible, easy to read
information for a range of different audiences including older people,
people with disabilities and people for whom English is not their first
language.

It will help you assess current design and content of information -
please bring examples to our document clinic - and follow an inclusive
model to improve accessibility across your communications mix.

The course will be of interest to anyone who is involved in the design
and delivery of information in print, electronic and web formats
including web content managers; content teams; marketing and
communications officers; and publications staff. To book a place see:
http://www.headstar-training.com/dfa/

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: British Standard for Web Access 'Aimed At Marketers'.

The forthcoming British Standard for accessible websites, BS8878, is
to be aimed at marketing departments of major retailers and suppliers
of consumer goods and services, it has emerged.

At an open planning meeting hosted this week by the British Standards
Institution (BSi -
http://www.bsi-global.com ),
the committee charged with producing the standard consulted a range
of other academic and technical bodies to ensure the new work will not
repeat or compete with other guidelines.

Following the meeting, BSi technical committee chair Julie Howell
told E-Access Bulletin that given the existence of other technical
standards for web accessibility such as the international Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG), it had been decided to shift the
focus towards the marketing departments and marketers at major
retailers and suppliers of goods and services to consumers. There had
not yet been a great deal of information on accessibility targeted at that
audience, Howell said.

"There was a strong feeling that we should produce the standard in a
language that marketers can understand. So what we're doing will not
be aimed at a technical level - we already have WCAG for that - but it
will reference marketing techniques, since the marketing departments
at major corporations are usually where the website budgets are."

The standard will not be aimed at public sector bodies, Howell said,
since they were already served by various guidelines including recent
ones issued by the Central Office of Information (see E-Access
Bulletin, June 2008 and Section Three, this issue). A first draft of
BS8878 will be published by the end of August and released for public
comment in September and October. Publication of the final standard
is due for April 2009.


+02: Charity Launches Manifesto for Digital Inclusion.

More help is needed to ensure the 'struggling seventh' - the most
disadvantaged 15 per cent of UK society - are reached by the benefits
of the information society, according to a 'Digital inclusion manifesto'
published by specialist consultancy humanITy
(http://www.humanity.org.uk).

Contrary to expectation the so-called 'digital divide' has compounded
exclusion among vulnerable groups, and while a lot of resources have
been directed towards the improving the access of the 'final third',
there is still more to be done for the most disadvantaged groups, the
manifesto finds.

The poorest people in UK society are understandably sceptical about
the benefits that they receive from new technology, it says. The
government is focusing on online service provision but more than 80%
of government transactions are undertaken by people who do not own a
home computer.

The manifesto stresses the need for action across a range of technology
platforms, from the home computer to mobile phones.

Often the IT skills that are provided to disadvantaged people are ones
at the bottom of the scale which are becoming unnecessary due to the
progress of automation, the manifesto says. A change in curriculum is
required to correct this.

NOTE: For edited extracts from the manifesto see section four, this
issue.


+03: Disability Body Blasts EU Anti-Discrimination Draft.

A draft anti-discrimination directive from the European Commission
has been criticised by a major disability lobby group for failing to
cover technology accessibility standards.

The commission's proposal, 'Non-discrimination and equal
opportunities: a renewed commitment', deals with discrimination
against people on the basis of disability, race, religion, gender or
sexual orientation and covers non-employment areas such as education,
social security and health care (see http://fastlink.headstar.com/eur8).

In a statement European disability Forum (EDF) President Yannis
Vardakastanis said the draft directive omits "important issues for
persons with disabilities as the concept of universal design, the
necessity of European and national accessibility standards and the right
to services ensuring inclusion."

In addition the document "leaves room for interpretation and will
create legal uncertainties", Vardakastanis said (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/edf2 ).

The EDF was created in 1996 to give a voice in the European Union to
Europe's 50 million disabled people (
http://www.edf-feph.org ).


++ News in Brief:

+04: Inclusive Toolkit: An online toolkit for producing policies
promoting ICT accessibility has been launched by the Global Initiative
for Inclusive ICTs (G3ict) and the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU). The resource will serve as a repository of policies and
strategies and a platform for sharing experiences:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/itu2 .

+05: Social Fix: A service allowing blind users of screenreaders to
report problems they encounter on web pages has been unveiled by
IBM. The Social Accessibility Project is a collaborative system that
allows visually impaired users to highlight web page faults such as
missing metadata, using a shortcut key command. The system logs the
reports on a central server and alerts sighted users known as
'supporters' who can then investigate the issue and help correct it for
future users. A short video explaining the process is available at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/social1 .
And the pilot software is at:
http://services.alphaworks.ibm.com/socialaccessibility/ .

+06: Employer's Erratum: In our last issue we incorrectly quoted the
Employer's Forum on Disability as saying financial services company
Legal and General reported an increase in online sales of £90,000 by
making their website more accessible. In fact the firm reported a 90%
increase in online sales by making the improvements. We apologise for
this slip.

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Fortune Cookie
- Web Sites That Really Work.

Fortune Cookie's dedicated web accessibility team makes sure that
everyone finds the web sites we design easy to use. As well as being
accessible, Fortune Cookie sites are beautiful and deliver stunning
return-on-investment. They're award-winning too. In 2007, our work
was nominated for major web design awards 11 times.

Legal & General, Kuoni, Diabetes UK, FT Business - just some of the
big name brands on Fortune Cookie's client list.

Every business can benefit from making its web site more accessible.
If you'd like to know what accessibility can do for your business, talk
to Fortune Cookie.

Visit our web site at:
http://www.fortunecookie.co.uk

Julie Howell is our Director of Accessibility. Email Julie at:
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: CAPTCHA Continues: Discussion has continued on our E-Access
Bulletin Live blog about the use of inaccessible 'CAPTCHA' anti-
spam tools by some websites, following our recent feature on the five
most common web accessibility errors by Robin Christopherson of
Abilitynet (see E-Access Bulletin, April 2008).

Tedd Sperling, a freelance programmer based in the US, posted a link
to a group of different types of 'CAPTCHA' tools he has created:
http://webbytedd.com/aa/assorted-captcha/

Sperling says: "I realise that the first demo is not acceptable, but do
any of the other examples work for those with disabilities? Granted
some will not because they require sight, but blindness is only one of
many different disabilities.

"Could a combination of different CAPTCHAs provide a solution, or is
CAPTCHA just one of the things that cannot be resolved?"

To join the discussion, see our 'E-Access Bulletin Live' blog:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=183#comments
We will track further comments in this section of the newsletter.


+08: Tag Precision: James Coltham, Acting Intranet Development
Officer in the Children and Families Department at City of Edinburgh
Council, raises another point relating to the piece on the five most
common web accessibility errors.

He says there is a slight inaccuracy in the original article, which said:
"Make sure that all images that are also links or buttons describe what
will happen when you click on them, e.g. alternative text as 'Marilyn
Monroe - click to read her life story'."

But Coltham says: "This is not really correct. The alternative
description of an image should be the exact equivalent of its
appearance. So if it is a photo of Marilyn Monroe with no text in the
image, it should just be 'Marilyn Monroe'. However, if that image is
also a hyperlink, the title attribute of the link itself can be used to
describe where the link goes to. I hope this might prove useful to your
readers."

[Further responses lease to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: VoiceOver Buddies: Reader Estelita Clayton writes in seeking
fellow users of the Apple OSX operating system's built-in screen-
reader software, VoiceOver.

She says: "I recently bought myself an iMac [running] OSX, and it has
the integrated voice called VoiceOver. I admired the Apple Mac people
for coming up with this brilliant idea to help us visually impaired
computer users!

"I wish you also could develop an iPod with integrated voice as well.
As a new Voice Over user, I'd like to get in touch to people who are
using the same system to share ideas and knowledge."

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com]

[Inbox ends].


++Special Notice: Building the Perfect Council Website
- Major International Keynote Speaker for 2008
- 16 July, Olympia 2, Central London
http://www.headstar-events.com/council08/ .

We are pleased to present our third annual event on how to create the
perfect council website: a partnership between E-Government Bulletin
and the Socitm Insight Programme.

Our keynote speaker this year is international web usability guru Gerry
McGovern. An authority on creating effective web content, Gerry has
been described by the Irish Times as one of the world's five leading
web visionaries (alongside Tim Berners-Lee, Tim O'Reilly, Nicholas
Negroponte and Vint Cerf).

Elsewhere, the event will draw on the collected wisdom of a decade of
Socitm's annual 'Better Connected' review of all UK council websites.
Workshops will cover issues in detail including boosting web service
take-up. Secure your place today at:
http://www.headstar-events.com/council08/

And for companies interested in exhibition spaces please contact Will
Knox on
will.knox@headstar.com or phone him on
01273 267974.

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three: News Focus
- Public Sector Web Accessibility Guidelines.

+10: Buried Sticks And Mixed Messages
by Dan Jellinek.

The new guidelines for UK public sector bodies on 'Delivering
inclusive websites' (see E-Access Bulletin, June 2008) are a
bewildering blend of the vague with the Draconian.

The guidance, published by the Central Office of Information (COI)
under the reference number 'TG102' ( see
http://www.coi.gov.uk/guidance.php?page=129 ),
stipulates that all new UK public sector websites must conform to at
least 'AA' accessibility standards as specified by the W3C Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines.

Existing central government department websites must conform to
'AA' by December 2009. "This includes websites due to converge on
Directgov or BusinessLink, unless convergence is scheduled before
this date," the guidelines state. Sites of all other government agencies
and non-departmental bodies must conform by March 2011.

The guidance is also strong and clear on the point of avoiding less
accessible content formats wherever possible. Content formats not
covered by WCAG 1.0 such as Flash, pdf and JavaScript "should only
be used if it is determined that they are the most appropriate for the
intended purpose. For example, this could be where the proposed
content enhances the functionality or understanding for the intended
audience."

Where such content formats are decided to be essential, "every attempt
should be made to ensure that the accessibility features of the relevant
authoring tool are used," the guidance states.

Other areas covered include a requirement for public bodies to submit
website accessibility policies to the accessibility sub-group of the
Digital People Network - a new forum set up by the COI for public
sector managers working with digital media - by December 2008. The
guidance also provides advice on planning, procurement, content
design and maintenance and assessment of accessibility through the
use of user testing and other methods.

So far, so comprehensive. But how strongly enforced will the
guidelines be?

Though not mandated by law, the guidance warns that "Government
websites owners are reminded to follow the conditions of use for a
.gov.uk name (TG114). Websites which fail to meet the .gov.uk
accessibility requirements may be at risk of having their domain name
withdrawn."

This softens the warning contained in a previous draft version of the
guidelines, which had used the stronger formulation: "websites which
fail to meet the mandated level of conformance shall be subject to the
withdrawal process for .gov.uk domain names".

Furthermore the 'conditions of use for .gov.uk name' referenced in the
guidance, Cabinet Office document TG114, are vague on accessibility
definitions.

They state: "Applications (web, email, etc) using a .gov.uk domain
name must comply with current UK legislation and support channels
that provide accessibility for disabled people, members of ethnic
minorities and those at risk of social/digital exclusion. Legislation
includes Copyright, Data Protection Act and Disability Discrimination
Act. Abuse of [sic] will result in the name being withdrawn" (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/caboff1 ).

How useful is this paragraph? It seems redundant for an official
document to specify that any form of government activity 'must
comply with current UK legislation'. And the suggestion that websites
must 'support channels that provide accessibility' also amounts to
little, since 'channels' - presumably, meaning media or technologies -
do not in themselves generally provide accessibility: this depends more
on how channels are used.

Perhaps more usefully, the .gov.uk conditions go on to state: "When
you are using a .gov.uk domain name to deliver a web presence you are
reminded that websites should comply with the e-Government
Interoperability Framework, the Guidelines for UK Government
websites and Framework for Local Government particularly on such
issues as use of metadata, PICS labelling, accessibility and security."

Following this increasingly convoluted trail to the 'e-Government
Interoperability Framework' (e-GIF) referenced here - and last
updated as version 6.1 in March of 2005 - we find a strikingly familiar
phrase in paragraph 2.23: "Government information systems will be
designed to meet UK legislation and to support channels that provide
accessibility for disabled people, members of ethnic minorities and
those at risk of social/digital exclusion."

With e-GIF, however, paragraph 6.25 contains some sterner warnings
associated with a failure to comply, namely that: "If a system fails the
test on any of the aspects listed above, then a migration strategy will
need to be produced and agreed by the e-Government Unit.Failing to
comply and the absence of an acceptable migration strategy will lead to
the following courses of action:

"- compliance with the e-GIF is one of the criteria that will be used
when assessing/evaluating departmental e-business strategies and
deciding on the release of funding by the e-Government Unit and HM
Treasury.

"- new systems failing to comply with the e-GIF will not get project
approval or funding from the appropriate bodies within their
organisations;

"- systems seeking to link to Directgov, the Government Gateway or
the Knowledge Network and failing to comply with the e-GIF will be
refused connection;

"- suppliers who are not prepared to meet the e-GIF specific
requirements or equivalents.will not meet [procurement]
specifications."

Clearly here, at last, are some hefty sticks with which to beat those
creating inaccessible websites. It is a shame, however, that they are
buried in a trail of paperwork two documents removed from 'inclusive
websites'.

Some rationalisation of all this advice is likely to be needed if the
laudably high accessibility levels stipulated in the new guidance are
ever to come close to realisation.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Opinion
- Digital Inclusion Manifesto.

+11: Helping Hand For The 'Struggling Seventh'.

Last month the digital inclusion charity and consultancy HumanITy
published its Digital Inclusion Manifesto (see also news, this issue).
We reproduce below an edited summary of the document:

Contrary to many Utopian predictions in the mid 1990s, the growth in
the ownership of digital technology has had a disappointing impact on
the 'Final third' of less advantaged people in our society, and even
more so on what could be termed the 'Struggling seventh', the most
disadvantaged 15 per cent of the population.

This manifesto sets out a broad range of proposals for dealing with the
major outstanding problems in e-inclusion, emphasising the necessary
shift from consumption to production and the need for a multi-platform
approach.

Often new, major technologies are regarded as panaceas but they
frequently create or exacerbate socio-economic differentials. This
expectation greeted cheap, personal computing but the evidence of its
real effectiveness has been limited; it has not been fully used in its
areas of key capacity such as the enablement of creativity and
convergence with broadcasting. Policy makers were aware of a
potential 'digital divide', but thought people could be 'trained out' of it.
This strategy has failed, partly because of a lack of incentive and an
emphasis on skills rendered redundant by automation at the expense of
emerging skills such as digital photography.

Poorer citizens have been rightly sceptical of the internet's benefits,
seeing it as 'top down' and not relevant to their needs. The
concentration on the PC-based platform and the problems of usability
and accessibility of e-government sites have been serious obstacles to
users; more than 80% of government transactions are undertaken by
people without a home PC.

A neglect of 'soft skills', an emphasis on autonomous consumption
rather than collaborative creation and a limited vision of creativity
have all held back the benefits of the digital society. Government needs
help to understand these phenomena.

Although there has been some political concentration on the 'final
third', we are left with the 'Struggling seventh' which needs its own,
resource-intensive policy agenda.

Each of our recommendations below is matched by a proposed strategy
or project, listed separately under humanITy's partnership agenda,
which can be found within the full manifesto on the web.

- Government needs help to make its services more usable by the vast
majority of its service users; this means abandoning its underlying bias
in favour of the PC platform.

- Government needs help in understanding the limited impact of the
information revolution on behaviour; its potential in the area of
collaboration and creativity; and its effect on the education system.

- The current model of intellectual property which rates all products,
regardless of their economic value, in the same way, needs radical
reform.

- Government needs help to integrate the most difficult cases (the
'Struggling seventh' 15% of the population) but this will need a high
concentration of effort beyond that reachable using government
resources. This will require new ways of working with non-
governmental organisations.

[Section Four ends]

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all
your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2008 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Reporter: Majeed Saleh
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey
Marketing Executive - Claire Clinton
Sales and Marketing - Jo Knell, Will Knox.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue 103 ends.]


