+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 102, June 2008.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details at the

end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter (TEN) 
Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 102 Contents.

01: Accessibility Deadlines Set For UK Government Websites
- But warning on non-compliance watered down from draft.

02: Major Employers Launch Accessibility Taskforce.
- Corporations urged to cater for all employees and customers.

03: Charity Embraces Social Networks and Second Life
- Contact a Family looks to support parents online.

News in Brief: 04: September Draft - BSI web standard update; 05: 
European Prize - inclusion wards; 06: Queen's Speech - talking 
newspapers win royal recognition.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Editor's note: Inbox missing this month due to technical 
difficulties.

Section Three: Organisation in the Spotlight - The Employers' Forum 
on Disability.
08: Blue Chip Access: Since 1991 the EFD, the largest organisation of 
its kind in the world, has campaigned for more inclusive, accessible 
workplaces. Dan Jellinek and James Scott report on the body's ultimate 
goal for its members - 'disability confidence'.

Section Four: Opinion - Web Accessibility.
+09: Life In the Post-Guideline Age: When people hear the term 
'accessibility' they tend to think of technical standards, but true 
equality of access means much more than that, says Julie Howell. 
Disabled people should be able to have the same experience as anyone 
else, and access the same services in the same time.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: Designing for all: an inclusive approach to web, 
print and electronic publishing
- A practical, one-day training course and document clinic
- Tuesday 24 June, Central London
http://www.headstar-training.com/dfa/

Trainer: Katie Grant, former publications manager, Disability Rights 
Commission.

'Designing for all' is a practical seminar designed to introduce 
organisations to the importance of designing accessible, easy to read 
information for a range of different audiences including older people, 
people with disabilities and people for whom English is not their first 
language.

It will help you assess current design and content of information - 
please bring examples to our document clinic - and follow an inclusive 
model to improve accessibility across your communications mix.

The course will be of interest to anyone who is involved in the design 
and delivery of information in print, electronic and web formats 
including web content managers; content teams; marketing and 
communications officers; and publications staff. To book a place see:
http://www.headstar-training.com/dfa/

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Accessibility Deadlines Set For UK Government Websites.

All new UK public sector websites must conform to at least 'AA' 
accessibility standards as specified by the W3C Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines, according to guidance published this month 
by the Cabinet Office.

Existing central government department websites must conform to 
'AA' by December 2009 and all other government agencies and non-
departmental bodies by March 2011, according to the guidance, 
'Delivering inclusive websites' (
http://www.coi.gov.uk/guidance.php?page=129 ).

The guidance allows public bodies a little more breathing space than 
was proposed in a draft published last autumn (see 
http://www.headstar.com/egblive/?p=55). This had called for 
compliance for all sites by December 2008.

The final guidance - which is not mandated by law - also tones down 
the severity of its warning of repercussions for non-compliant bodies, 
compared with last year's draft.

The draft had threatened to switch off non-compliant websites 
altogether, warning: "websites which fail to meet the mandated level of 
conformance shall be subject to the withdrawal process for .gov.uk 
domain names". The final guidance issues a similar warning, but using 
the softer formula 'may be at risk' instead of 'shall be subject to': 
"Government website owners are reminded to follow the conditions of 
use for a .gov.uk name (Registering .gov.uk domain names (TG114)). 
Websites which fail to meet the .gov.uk accessibility requirements may 
be at risk of having their domain name withdrawn".

The conditions of use for .gov.uk domains referenced here, document 
TG114, do not spell out in clear terms what precise actions government 
websites need to take to be accessible. Instead they state in general 
terms: "Applications (web, email, etc) using a .gov.uk domain name 
must comply with current UK legislation and support channels that 
provide accessibility for disabled people.Abuse of [sic] will result in 
the name being withdrawn" (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/caboff1 ).

Other areas covered by the new guidance includes a requirement for 
bodies to produce website accessibility policies; and advice on 
assessment of accessibility through the use of user testing and other 
methods.


+02: Major Employers Launch Accessibility Taskforce.

A taskforce to help businesses provide accessible technology to 
employees and customers has been launched by the UK's Employers' 
Forum on Disability (EFD -
http://www.efd.org.uk),
a body whose members include some of the country's largest 
corporations and public agencies.

The aim of the forum's Business Taskforce on Accessible Technology 
is to "make accessibility and usability as fundamental to IT as security

is now," said Steve Lamey, Chief Operating Officer of HM Revenue & 
Customs and chair of the new group.

Some parts of the business community are still failing to see the 
benefits of improving accessibility, the forum says. Accordingly, one 
of the most important jobs of the new taskforce will be to promote 
awareness of the strong business case for engaging with disabled 
people as both colleagues and customers.

Accessibility adjustment can be simple and inexpensive, such as 
making better use of accessibility options in MS Office, and can lead to

major benefits, the forum says. For example, accessible recruitment 
would open the door to another 1.3 million potential employees in the 
UK, it says. And accessible websites can be up to 75 per cent smaller, 
making them quicker to load and reducing infrastructure demand. 
Legal and General's new accessible website increased online sales by 
90,000 pounds and reduced costs by over 200,000 per annum, the 
forum says.

Taskforce members include representatives of leading global brands 
such as Goldman Sachs and Sainsbury's. It will help members share 
tips and advice; encourage suppliers to deliver more accessible 
products; and try to improve training in the provision of accessible IT 
solutions.

NOTE: For a full background report on the Employers' Forum on 
Disability see 'Organisation in the Spotlight', Section Four, this
issue.


+03: Charity Embraces Social Networks And Second Life.

A leading charity is using a wide range of social networking and 
multimedia sites - Facebook, MySpace, Bebo, YouTube and iTunes  - 
to provide support and information to parents of disabled children and 
help them contact each other.

Contact a Family (http://www.cafamily.org.uk/), which runs a parent 
networking website called Making Contact 
(http://www.makingcontact.org/), says parents of disabled children 
often feel isolated because they don't know anybody in the same 
situation. But mothers, who are often the primary carers for children 
with disabilities, are now among the biggest users of social networking 
sites, it says.

Srabani Sen, Chief Executive of Contact a Family says: "Mums 
exhausted by night after night of broken sleep and restricted from 
leaving the house because of their intensive caring roles are turning to

social networking sites for emotional support and information about 
their child's condition."

The charity has also set up a 'virtual library' in the online world 
Second Life, which has welcomed around 100 visitors since its launch 
in May. The virtual library is manned every Wednesday from 10am - 
4pm when 'Advisor Somerflek', the charity's avatar or virtual persona, 
is on hand to talk to visitors courtesy of a real-world parent adviser. 
For those in the know, the office is located at the co-ordinates Aloft 
Island 19.40.22 .

The charity is by no means the first to set up in Second Life and the 
virtual world's owners, Linden Labs, offer special discounts to non-
profit bodies (http://secondlifegrid.net/programs/nonprofit). A notable 
example is Save the Children who collected money to provide animals 
for Tibetan peasants by selling virtual Yaks.


++ News in Brief:

+04: September Draft: The British Standards Institution is to issue a 
draft of its planned standard for accessible website development in 
September, E-Access Bulletin has learned. Julie Howell, chair of the 
BSi's technical committee IST45/Web Accessibility which is 
responsible for drawing up the new standard, said the group is 
currently finalising the structure of the document and drafting will 
follow for September consultation. The standard itself, which has now 
been allocated the number BS8878, is expected to be published in 
April 2009:
http://www.bsi-global.com .


+05: European Prize: A set of awards aimed at inspiring progress 
towards fighting digital exclusion has been announced by the European 
Commission. The European e-Inclusion Awards will be awarded to 
individuals, organisations and companies in seven categories including 
e-accessibility. Entries close on 12 September, with winners 
announced in December, and a special briefing session on the project 
will be held in Brussels on 27 June:
http://www.e-inclusionawards.eu/ .


Queen's Speech: National Talking Newspapers and Magazines, a 
Sussex-based charity making newspapers available in accessible 
formats for blind and print-disabled people, has won the prestigious 
Queen's Award for Voluntary Service. Since 1984 the charity has been 
providing newspapers and magazines in a variety of formats including 
tape, audio CD, DAISY format talking book CD and audio download. 
The charity produces more than 200 newspaper and magazine titles 
each year and delivers 1 million tapes and CDs:
http://www.queensawardvoluntary.gov.uk/


[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Fortune Cookie
- Web Sites That Really Work.

Fortune Cookie's dedicated web accessibility team makes sure that 
everyone finds the web sites we design easy to use. As well as being 
accessible, Fortune Cookie sites are beautiful and deliver stunning 
return-on-investment. They're award-winning too. In 2007, our work 
was nominated for major web design awards 11 times.

Legal & General, Kuoni, Diabetes UK, FT Business - just some of the 
big name brands on Fortune Cookie's client list.

Every business can benefit from making its web site more accessible. 
If you'd like to know what accessibility can do for your business, talk 
to Fortune Cookie.

Visit our web site at:
http://www.fortunecookie.co.uk

Julie Howell is our Director of Accessibility. Email Julie at:
Julie.Howell@fortunecookie.co.uk .

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section Two: Inbox
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

++07: Editor's Note - Technical Problems: Owing to technical 
problems, we have unfortunately lost some of our email including the 
most recent submissions to our Inbox section.

We apologise for this, which has never happened before, and will do 
our best to ensure it never happens again. In the meantime, if you have 
sent in a message or response to Inbox since last month's issue, we 
would appreciate it if you could resend it to the usual address - 
inbox@headstar.com - and we will publish the missing messages next 
month.

Do also send in any new queries or comments you may have on our 
coverage or on any issue relating to access to technology by all, and we

will also publish any new messages.

Best regards,
Dan Jellinek, Editor, E-Access Bulletin.

[Section Two ends].


++Section Three: Organisation in the Spotlight
- The Employers' Forum on Disability.

+08: Blue Chip Access
By Dan Jellinek and James Scott.

The creation of the Employers' Forum on Disability (EFD) Business 
Taskforce on Accessible Technology (see News, this issue) is a sign 
that the UK's and the world's largest companies and organisations are 
beginning to take accessibility seriously.

The taskforce aims to help global ICT suppliers and regulators 
understand what organisations need from IT products and standards if 
they are to employ and do business with disabled people.

So what kind of body is the EFD?

The forum claims to be the largest and most active organisation of its 
kind in the world. It has campaigned since 1991 for more accessible 
and inclusive workplaces, collaborating with disabled people, 
government and businesses to help make it easier for firms to employ 
disabled people and serve disabled customers.

It has published numerous guidelines advising its members on how to 
improve provisions for the disabled, on topics such as employment, 
customer care, IT, e-commerce, e-recruitment, the built environment, 
product development, corporate responsibility, procurement, health and 
safety, occupational health, marketing and communications.

Among its highest profile projects is the Disability Standard, which the

EFD claims is the only management tool available that allows 
organisations to accurately measure their performance on disability, 
including access to IT. In 2007, some 116 UK and global private and 
public sector employers used the standard.

The forum also sponsors the Great Place to Work Institute's Disability 
Excellence Award, which has been won three times in a row by the 
investment bank Lehman Brothers. The bank's exemplary measures 
include some innovation with technology such as an intranet sites for 
disabled employees and a scheme whereby hearing-impaired 
employees are given a Blackberry portable email device to carry at 
work, which is activated via pre-set alert information in case of 
emergency evacuation from a lift or building.

The EFD says it has been promoting the benefits of accessible IT in 
several ways for many years prior to the establishment of its new 
taskforce, including the publication of a practical guide to accessible 
web design and the delivery of accessibility training events. Despite 
these services, however, the body acknowledges that poor practice 
does continue among UK businesses.

"Poor practice relating to access to technology has been well 
publicised, such as the 2004 Disability Rights Commission report on 
Access and Inclusion for Disabled People," EFD spokesperson Liz 
Nightingale told E-Access Bulletin. "Since this report was published a 
number of organisations including EFD members like Legal and 
General and Lloyds TSB, have been working hard to demonstrate best 
practice around accessible IT."

Despite the progress, the forum knows there is still plenty of work to 
be done if it is to achieve its ultimate stated goal of completely 
outlawing discrimination in the workplace. Nevertheless, its founder 
and chief executive Susan Scott-Parker is determined that this 
objective will be achieved.

Scott-Parker, a Canadian who has lived in Britain for 25 years, 
established the forum in 1991. Since then it has grown rapidly to its 
current size of 400 members including 120 global companies, which 
between them employ eight million people, or some 20 per cent of the 
UK's workforce. Members include Barclays, whose group CEO John 
Varley is current EFD president; and Royal Mail Group, whose CEO 
Adam Crozier is chair. And the forum's prestigious 'President's group' 
read like a who's who of British business, from Tesco CEO Sir Terry 
Leahy to BT's chief Ben Verwaayen. The purpose of such a senior 
grouping is to signal to colleagues, customers, and government that 
disability is a strategic business and societal priority, the forum
says.

Scott-Parker has also been involved in many international projects in 
the disability arena including helping the International Labour 
Organisation ILO establish the Sri Lankan employers' network on 
disability and pioneering the world's first leadership program for 
people with disabilities, in partnership with consultants The Coverdale 
Organisation. In 2000 she was honoured with an OBE.

It is a sign of how seriously the forum now takes accessibility
therefore 
that Scott-Parker has stepped forward to chair the new taskforce 
herself.

"The taskforce is a continuation of our work around accessible IT and 
our long-term goal is to develop guidance to help our members 
confidently measure and improve the accessibility of internal systems 
and external services," says Liz Nightingale. "We are also pleased to 
be represented on IST/45, the British Standards Institution committee 
responsible for creating BS8878, the first British standard on web 
accessibility. This is due to be published in the first quarter of 2009.


"One of the biggest objectives for the taskforce this year is to engage 
with key players in the IT industry and we are delighted that 
representatives from some of these organisations are meeting with 
taskforce members in the middle of June to informally discuss the 
business case for disability. We see this as the beginning of a very 
exciting and meaningful collaboration which will result in barrier free 
IT for all employees".

Ultimately, the goal of all the forum's work could be summed up by a 
phrase which appears in its citation to the three-time winner of its 
disability excellence awards, Lehman Brothers - 'disability 
confidence'.

"We are looking for an approach to disability that is above and beyond 
legal compliance," says Rhiannon Suter, research and innovations 
manager at EFD. "We are looking for 'disability confidence,' meaning 
that the company understands the benefits and has the flexibility to 
remove barriers for groups of disabled people, but also make 
adjustments that enable individuals to contribute."

If the new taskforce can achieve this for the use of technology in the 
workplace and its development for the consumer, all its goals will have 
been achieved.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Opinion
- Web Accessibility.

+09: Life In the Post-Guideline Age.
by Julie Howell.

Joe Clark, the Canadian web accessibility expert, has said that he 
believes we now live in a post-guideline era.

What might Joe mean by this?

To date, talk about making websites usable by disabled people has 
usually featured the W3C Web Accessibility Initiative Web 
Accessibility Guidelines as a key aspect. This is absolutely appropriate

and remains the crucial foundation of every website.

However research, such as that undertaken by the Disability Rights 
Commission in 2004, has suggested that even those organisations that 
believe they have applied accessibility guidelines when designing their 
sites are not always producing websites that disabled people can use 
with sufficient degrees of success.

This would seem to point to a gap in understanding between web 
developers and the guidelines. It may be that developers fully 
understand the technical aspects of the guidelines but are failing to 
address disabled people's user experiences. An accessible website that 
is unusable is of little help to disabled people, so in order to create
web 
experiences that are meaningful for disabled people perhaps it's time 
we began to think beyond technical guidelines and put stronger focus 
on usability for disabled people.

It is crucial to understand that thinking around web usability for 
disabled people is maturing year by year. Technology improves and 
our understanding of how disabled people use the web improves.

In the past, accessibility advocates have promoted the 'design for all' 
and 'one size fits all' approaches to web design, where a single version

of the site is designed to be accessible to everyone, regardless of
ability 
or disability. However, personalisation is now a very common web 
design practice where everyone who visits a site (be they disabled or 
not) is served a version of the content and design that is optimised 
according to their individual needs and preferences.

In the 'real' world we are naturally opposed to alternative entrances to

buildings or different levels of service provision for disabled people,
as 
'alternative' and 'different' in this context often means 'segregated'
and 
'poorer quality'. However, online personalisation really means 'better 
quality' with web experiences optimised to better suit every individual.

This does not mean text-only versions of sites for disabled people. But 
it can mean optimised content that is easier and quicker to navigate if 
you are using a screenreader (for example).

I cite as an example Tesco.com. Tesco has - after extensive user testing

with screenreader users - created an optimised version of its e-grocery 
service to give screenreader users a better quality, faster shopping 
experience with access to its full product range. Some screenreader 
users feel this is unacceptable, believing one version of the site
should 
cater for everyone's needs, while others are happier to use a site that
is 
optimised for screenreader use.

A few years ago I would have agreed that creating an 'alternative' 
version of a website is not acceptable. But today, with everyone 
receiving an online experience that is virtually tailored for them 
individually, the optimised approach seems to offer greater benefits. 
The UK's Disability Discrimination Act requires equality of service 
provision. Does this mean blind people should use the same version of 
a website even if it greatly slows them down, or is an optimised 
version that allows a faster, better quality user experience preferable,

so long as the standard of service is equal to that received by people 
who are not disabled? If you think in terms of excellent user 
experiences for disabled people, optimisation and personalisation 
would seem to have more to offer.

We need to keep our eyes on web trends and recognise trends that 
actually help to improve disabled people's experience of the web. 
Arguably, personalisation is a trend that actually helps as its focus is
on 
sites' best possible performance for every user and is a great deal more

effective that the 'one site for all' approach.

Guidance is changing. Watch out for version 2.0 of WCAG, which 
should be published in 2009, and the new British Standard for web 
accessibility (BS8878) that should appear next April. There is a shift
of 
emphasis towards including user testing by disabled people that 
encourages web developers to be mindful of disabled people's online 
experiences.

The new approach will also appeal to businesses and this is also very 
good news for disabled web users. The aim of any website is to convert 
its visitors into customers. Businesses are now investing a good deal 
more time and money into optimising 'user journeys' to ensure that the 
people using their sites find the route to making a purchase (or finding

the information they are looking for) as quick, easy and enjoyable as 
possible.

I think of this as a pyramid. Web accessibility is the foundation. 
Usability by disabled people is the next layer. And both of these 
underpin the ultimate goal: excellent user experiences by disabled 
people (and everyone).

If we really want equality on the web, it strikes me that we must adopt 
the language that businesses are using when they talk about creating 
websites that maximise profit. Right now, businesses are really 
interested in how the web can quickly deliver return on investment 
through increased sales. They are looking to web usability techniques 
to achieve the creation of excellent user experiences for everyone 
because they know this leads to increased sales. We need to make sure 
that businesses understand that disabled people have a right to 
excellent user experiences too and to view disabled people as simply 
another target audience. If we can do this, our goal of online inclusion

and equality really could become reality.

NOTE: Julie Howell delivered the keynote speech at this year's E-
Access '08 conference, hosted by E-Access Bulletin 
(http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess08). Julie is Director of 
Accessibility at Fortune Cookie and chairs the British Standards 
Institution's committee on web accessibility (see also News in brief, 
this issue).

[Section Four ends]


++Special Notice: Building the Perfect Council Website
- Major International Keynote Speaker for 2008
- 16 July, Olympia 2, Central London
http://www.headstar-events.com/council08/ .

We are pleased to present our third annual event on how to create the 
perfect council website: a partnership between E-Government Bulletin 
and the Socitm Insight Programme.

Our keynote speaker this year is international web usability guru Gerry 
McGovern. An authority on creating effective web content, Gerry has 
been described by the Irish Times as one of the world's five leading 
web visionaries (alongside Tim Berners-Lee, Tim O'Reilly, Nicholas 
Negroponte and Vint Cerf).

Elsewhere, the event will draw on the collected wisdom of a decade of 
Socitm's annual 'Better Connected' review of all UK council websites. 
Workshops will cover issues in detail including boosting web service 
take-up. Secure your place today at:
http://www.headstar-events.com/council08/

And for companies interested in exhibition spaces please contact Will 
Knox on
will.knox@headstar.com or phone him on
01273 267974.

[Special notice ends].

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all 
your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put 
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2008 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this 
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always 
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also 
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of 
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken

from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web 
site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Reporter: Majeed Saleh
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey
Marketing Executive - Claire Clinton
Sales and Marketing - Jo Knell, Will Knox.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue 102 ends.]
