+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 52, APRIL 2004.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription
details at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 52 CONTENTS.

01: WAI director defends validity of guidelines
- new research raises concerns over international standards.

02: Apples to speak
- Macintosh computers gain built-in screen-reader.

03: Stockton pioneers talking timetables
- ground-breaking experiment with transport information.

04: Free internet safety resource for children
- developed as part of RNIB review.

News in brief: 05: Poor numbers - disability organisations rapped;
06: CSUN shines - conference webcasts; 07: Hindi reader - Indian
access pioneer.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - readers' forum.
08: Audio-description challenge - quiz show comments; 09: Civil
precedent - Indian civil service; 10: Hit compilation - accessible
java compiler and downloadable Braille; 11: More fonts - ongoing
readability debate; 12: Research questionnaire - university project.

Section three: Focus - web research.
13: Global standards in the spotlight: Today sees the publication of
the biggest ever research project into web accessibility. Dan Jellinek
assesses the implications for developers and international standard-
setters.

Section four: Seminar report - accessible e-government.
14: Democratising the information society: Public service bodies have
a legal and moral imperative to ensure their online services are
accessible to all. Julie Hill reports.

[Contents ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: WAI DIRECTOR DEFENDS VALIDITY OF GUIDELINES.

The director of the international Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI -
http://www.w3c.org/WAI), Judy Brewer, has defended her
organisation's Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG -
http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG10) - the accepted international
standard in the field - following the appearance of research
appearing to show gaps in their coverage.

Results of the world's most extensive programme of web accessibility
research are being published today by the Disability Rights
Commission of Great Britain (http://www.drc-gb.org). The research
was commissioned last year from the Centre for Human Computer
Interaction Design at City University, which examined 1,000 web sites
using a combination of automated software testing and task-based
testing using groups of testers with disabilities.

The WAI guidelines - which are divided into 'checkpoints' of levels
'A', 'AA' and 'AAA' in order of increasing accessibility - were used
as the main external benchmarks for the assessments. The team found
that just 19 per cent of home pages passed on level 'A' checks, and
when it came to level 'AA', just two sites out of the 1,000 (0.2 per
cent) passed a series of automated and manual checks. No sites were
found to reach 'AAA' compliance.

Researchers also found that only 55 per cent of specific usability
problems reported by the testers were covered by any of the WCAG
checkpoints, an apparent disjuncture between the WAI guidelines and
real-life problems encountered. And many of the WAI checks seemed
redundant, as they were almost always passed - some of the manual
checks, for example, are passed up to 95 per cent of the time.

"This data could be used to refine WAI and make it more usable for
people, because clearly web developers are struggling with WAI,"
according to Professor Helen Petrie who led the research at City
University. "But it also shows that WAI is not the be-all and
end-all: people need to test their sites with real users."

WAI Director Judy Brewer told E-Access Bulletin this week that many
of the general accessibility problems found which are not covered by
WCAG are covered by WAI's User Agent Accessibility Guidelines
(http://www.w3.org/TR/UAAG10), which describe accessibility of
browsers and media players and their interoperability with assistive
technologies and complement the content guidelines.

On the point that some checks seem barely worth including as they are
passed by the great majority of sites, Brewer said: "WCAG includes
checkpoints based on their priority for ensuring accessibility for
people with disabilities, not on how frequently those checkpoints are
already met on the average web site. [The guidelines are] already organised
in  three priority levels, so web developers can initially address a
relatively small set of issues that have the greatest impact on
barrier-reduction."

Brewer said the new findings are not incompatible with WCAG, which
"specifically address accessibility problems that create the most
severe barriers for people with disabilities, not the broad spectrum of
usability
issues which affect all users. At the same time, WAI has always
recognised the importance of incorporating user testing of
accessibility
features into a comprehensive evaluation of the accessibility of web
sites." WAI is currently working on version 2.0 of WCAG, Brewer
said, which may also address any remaining concerns about version
1.0. "WAI . . . welcomes contributions such as the results of this
research".

NOTE: For a full report on the new research see Section Three, this
issue.


+02: APPLES TO SPEAK.

Speech technology is to be integrated into new versions of the Apple
Macintosh operating system, providing blind and vision-impaired users
with access to its computers for the first time, technology giant
Apple has announced.

The technology, known as Spoken Interface
(http://www.apple.com/accessibility/spokeninterface), includes voice
output, sound cues, and enhanced keyboard functions to help users
navigate through desktop items, menus, toolbars, palettes and other
on-screen objects that were previously unavailable to them, and to help
them use applications more easily. According to Apple, Spoken
Interface will be integrated into the next major release of the
operating system OSX.

For many blind computer users this will be their first chance to
access Mac applications, since most developers of text-to-speech
screen-readers have focused their efforts on desktop computers running
Windows. The situation was made still worse last year when the
specialist US access technology firm ALVA, creator of what has been
until now the most widely available screen-reader for Macs
'OutSPOKEN', announced it was to discontinue the product from the
beginning of 2004, while honouring all warranties and service
agreements which still apply.

"Until now, Apple's record on accessibility has been dreadful,"
assistive technology consultant Peter Bosher told E-Access Bulletin
this month. "There is some ability to change the size and type of
screen
fonts and on-screen switches, but that's about it. Blind people have
had to avoid Apple Macs like the plague."

In particular, the new Macs will open up possibilities for blind
people to use sound recording and editing equipment which is generally
perceived as the music industry standard, Bosher said. "In recording
studios Macs rather than PCs are the computers of choice. They are
everywhere," he said.


+03: STOCKTON PIONEERS TALKING TIMETABLES.

A ground-breaking service providing travel information to people with
impaired vision through handheld devices is being tested by residents
of Stockton-on-Tees, paving the way for similar services to be
introduced across the UK. Volunteers are using mobile phones to
access real-time information about Stockton bus services, and fully
searchable timetables stored on compact discs in the international
DAISY talking book format (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/stockton1).

Last month Transport Secretary Alistair Darling visited Stockton-on-
Tees Borough Council - one of the project's partners - to meet
volunteers and council staff, and to see the technology at work. "He
was very interested in how DAISY timetables would be produced and
the potential to make them available elsewhere in the UK if the
Stockton scheme is successful," said a spokesperson for the council.

Other participants include Stockton Blind People's Voice
(http://www.blindvoice.co.uk), mobile phone operator Vodafone, the
RNIB, and the Department for Transport, which has provided 153,000
pounds to help fund the project.

According to borough council transport engineer John Kavanagh, using
CDs to store timetables and digitised voice outputs to access the
information is the most practical option for vision-impaired people.
"Tapes are difficult to provide because they need replacing every
time a service schedule changes, and users need to search to find the
section
they need. Braille is only used by some blind people and does not
lend itself to production of timetables," he said.

"The solution is to provide travellers with fully searchable CDs and
the
readers to enable them to access the data. No other authority in the
UK has tried this."


+04: FREE INTERNET SAFETY RESOURCE FOR CHILDREN.

The RNIB is to create a free resource on safe use of the internet by
children and young people with impaired vision, E-Access Bulletin has
learned. The resource is to be made available on the web and in
several other formats.

The move comes as part of an ongoing strategic review by the
institute
of its technology services to children. A meeting last month held as
part of the review process examined responses to questionnaire and
focus-group research carried out into the use of assistive
technologies by children of school age and their support by teachers.

Other issues covered at the meeting included the availability and
consistency of training for education professionals and students on
the use of assistive technologies.

The RNIB's ICT development officer for children Will Pearson, who is
leading the review, said the gap between young people obtaining
assistive equipment and receiving training for its use has been too
wide. There were problems to solve surrounding accreditation of
trainers and availability of funds, he said.

Pearson said teachers of visually-impaired students are often unaware
of what support is available to their pupils, and are also failing to
pursue accessibility concerns with computer network administrators at
their schools.

The review is set to conclude with a final presentation of its
findings in July.
A separate RNIB report is due out in May on the findings of a joint
project with the Department for Education and Skills looking at the
experiences of vision-impaired students with the DAISY
(http://www.daisy.org) talking book system, and how the greatest
benefits can be derived from DAISY materials.


++NEWS IN BRIEF:

+05: POOR NUMBERS: Some 60 per cent of disability organisations'
websites fail to achieve basic standards of accessibility, according
to a new report from communications agency Ethical Media. 'Disability
50' reviewed the web sites of 50 organisations, and found that the
web sites of technology access charity AbilityNet and the British Council
for Disabled People were exemplary:
http://www.ethicalmedia.com/stories/disability50 .

+06: CSUN SHINES: Key presentations from the 19th annual
'Technology and persons with disabilities' conference hosted by the
Center on Disabilities at California State University Northridge
(CSUN) are now available online, courtesy of internet TV specialists
TVWorldwide. The presentations, demonstrations and interviews can
be accessed using Windows media player or Real player:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun9 .

+07: HINDI READER: Visually-impaired computer programmer
Dinesh Kaushal has helped develop the first Hindi screen reader in
India with a Lucknow-based software development company and the
National Association for the Blind in Delhi. The team is planning to
equip vision-impaired government staff across India with the screen
reader which will cost 2,000 to 3,000 rupees (between 25 and 38 UK
pounds):
http://fastlink.headstar.com/hindi1 .

[Section one ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: WEB ACCESSIBILITY FORUM.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating
to web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new
accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along
and join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.

- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+08: AUDIO-DESCRIPTION CHALLENGE: Clive Lever of
Maidstone in Kent, a long-time correspondent to our bulletin, was
surprised to hear the BBC quiz programme University Challenge cited
as a programme which is perceived by some as verbal and so not in
need of audio-description (see story 13, section four, issue 51,
March 2004).

"Even largely verbal quiz shows often have purely visual portions,"
he said. "University Challenge has the pictorial round. The Channel Four
programme Countdown has the conundrum at the end, whose letters
are put up on screen. Viewers join in by trying to solve it, but
listeners wait for the result. When they had a blind contestant on the
programme
it became fully accessible - for a week. When she left, it went back
to its old ways.

"Perhaps there is a case for some programme makers to think about
what information is being conveyed verbally. Take the news reporter
who says: "The police have taken this and this, and turned them into
this," using pictures to clarify the pronouns. Then take the reporter
who says instead: "The police have taken this helmet and this camera and
turned them into helmetcam". Suddenly there's less need for extra
dialogue.

Referring to another part of the article which described the common
practice of putting the audio-description track for programmes on a
special channel which could only be picked up using wireless
headphones, Clive said: "I also think it an insult and a frustration
that
the technology may assume that blind viewers would be isolated in the
corner with their headphones, and that no sighted people would ever
find audio description anything but an irritation.

"Surely there are times when sighted people follow their favourite TV
programmes in 'eyes busy' situations. I'd have liked to have seen an
audio-description that comes over the main speakers, but which can be
switched on and off at will, but with the option of headphones if
required." [Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: CIVIL PRECEDENT: Harish Kotian writes in from India to ask
if any of our readers have information about blind people working in
the UK civil service. He says: "A friend of mine is denied
appointment
in the Indian civil services on reasons of his visual disability, so
a precedent would be highly desirable, as we still adopt the British
model."
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: HIT COMPILATION: In our last issue, Karina Gregory asked if
anyone knew of an accessible Java compiler. Tim Culhane of
communications solutions provider Critical Path Ireland says: "I've
heard that Eclipse (http://www.eclipse.org) [an open source solution]
is the most accessible." He adds that there is an email list dedicated
to the
discussion of java accessibility. "People on that list will be able
to tell you which versions of what compilers work with different screen
readers." To subscribe to the list readers should send a mail to
LISTSERV@java.sun.com with 'subscribe java-access' in the message
body.

Karina also asked if anyone knew where to obtain a Braille font to
translate on-screen text into Braille so that it can be printed out
and transferred onto 'swell paper' to create readable Braille. She had
been aware that the RNIB used to offer one but could no longer find it.

Stephen Bennett of the Visual Impairment Team at Leicester City
Council's education department wrote in to say: "The RNIB Braille
font is still available from the RNIB home page
(http://www.rnib.org.uk)." Type Braille in the search box at the
site,
Bennett says, and from the list of links that is produced choose the
one about six links down that is simply headed 'Braille' (not the one a
little
way above it headed 'Downloadable Braille Truetype Font'). You will
then be offered the download as a zip file.

And web designer Tedd Sperling (http://www.sperling.com) sends in
another useful link to Braille and sign language fonts from the Texas
School for the Blind and Visually Impaired web site:
http://www.tsbvi.edu/Education/fonts.html .


+11: MORE FONTS: Contributions continue to arrive on the topic of
readable fonts. John Taylor writes: "There is a font called Tiresias
LP Font which is recommended by the RNIB [and] has been designed for
people with eyesight problems. I personally have the eyesight
condition Nystagmus and since finding this font I have changed my
settings so it is my standard. I would highly recommend it for people
who do want to make use of a clearly readable font.

"I believe this font is available from the RNIB or simply contact me
and I will happily email you a copy." [Please contact John through
inbox@headstar.com].

And Vernon Webb of the Physical and Sensory Support Service at
Herefordshire Council Education Directorate writes: "In the
discussions about fonts in the last two issues of E-Access Bulletin I
was surprised to see no mention of Verdana. I use it for my pupils
(poor victims of my experiments!) because it distinguishes between
numeric digit 1, lower case letter L and upper case letter i better
than
Arial. Also the characters are wider and more rounded. Finally, it is
readily available in most Windows systems. Does anyone else use it,
or have particular reasons for disliking it?"
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+12: RESEARCH QUESTIONNAIRE: Duncan Glendinning, a final
year computer science student at Bath University, writes in to ask
for
some help with a research project on internet accessibility. "As part
of my project, I have posted a questionnaire online for vision-impaired
internet users. I would be hugely grateful if some of your readers
could visit it and take a little time to respond:
http://www.dunkweb.co.uk/emailform/forms.html .

[Section two ends].


SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- WEB RESEARCH.

+13: GLOBAL STANDARDS IN THE SPOTLIGHT
by Dan Jellinek.

Results of the biggest ever programme of research into web
accessibility are being unveiled today in the UK, revealing a range
of important lessons for web developers worldwide.

Back in March 2003 the Disability Rights Commission for England,
Scotland and Wales (http://www.drc-gb.org) announced that its first
formal investigation was to be into web site accessibility. It
subsequently commissioned the Centre for Human Computer
Interaction Design at City University, led by Professor Helen Petrie,
to undertake research which was eventually to span some 39,000 web
pages across 1,000 sites.

Professor Petrie's team selected around 200 sites to test in each of
five
main categories: government and information; business to business; e-
commerce; leisure; and web services, such as internet service
providers
and search engines. They then oversaw a process which began with
automated checks using the WebXM software tool from Watchfire
(http://www.watchfire.com) and, where these checks were passed,
proceeded to task-based testing using groups of testers with
disabilities using a range of assistive technologies.

The main external benchmarks used for the assessments were,
unsurprisingly, the web content accessibility guidelines (WCAG)
developed by the world wide web consortium's web accessibility
initiative (www.w3c.org/WAI).

The guidelines are divided into 'checkpoints' of levels 'A', 'AA' and
'AAA' in order of increasing accessibility. It is generally
considered
that UK disability law now makes level 'A' conformance compulsory
to avoid the risk of legal action, and UK government guidelines
(http://www.e-envoy.gov.uk/webguidelines.htm) go further, stipulating
that public sector web sites should attain at least partial 'AA'
conformance.

The new research finds these targets are optimistic, to say the
least.
The team found that just 19 per cent of home pages passed on level
'A' checks, and when it came to level 'AA', just two sites out of the
1,000 (0.2 per cent) passed a series of automated and manual checks. No
sites were found to reach 'AAA' compliance.

The research also threw up some anomalies with the WAI guidelines
themselves. According to Petrie, only 55 per cent of usability
problems
reported by the testers were covered by any of the WCAG checkpoints,
on the face of it an astonishing gap between real problems faced and
those included in the main accepted international testing system.

And many of the WAI checks seemed redundant, as they were almost
always passed - some of the manual checks, for example, are passed
up to 95 per cent of the time.

"This data could be used to refine WAI and make it more usable for
people, because clearly web developers are struggling with WAI,"
Petrie says. "But it also shows that WAI is not the be-all and
end-all:
people need to test their sites with real users."

The Director of the WAI, Judy Brewer, told E-Access Bulletin that
many of the key accessibility problem types listed by the testers
that are not covered by WCAG are covered by WAI's User Agent
Accessibility Guidelines, which describe accessibility of browsers
and media players and their interoperability with assistive technologies
and are meant to be complementary to the content guidelines.

And on the point that some checks seem barely worth including as they
are passed by the great majority of sites, Brewer said: "WCAG
includes checkpoints based on their priority for ensuring
accessibility
for people with disabilities, not on how frequently those checkpoints
are already met on the average web site. [The guidelines are] already
organised in three priority levels, so web developers can initially
address a relatively small set of issues that have the greatest
impact on barrier-reduction."

Although the DRC has decided not to name and shame any of the sites
which were included in the tests and failed to reach basic
accessibility
standards, it has decided to name several of the sites which the
panel of testers felt were the easiest to use.

These sites include the national online library catalogue Copac
(http://www.copac.ac.uk); online financial services group Egg
(http://www.egg.com); the charity Oxfam (http://www.oxfam.org.uk);
the voluntary organisation Spinal Injuries Scotland
(http://www.sisonline.org); and the 'British dialect translator'
comedy site Whoohoo (http://www.whoohoo.co.uk).

Petrie says this diverse grouping of sites demonstrates that all
kinds of
sites can be usable and accessible. The Spinal Injuries Scotland
site, for
example, shows you can create an accessible site on a small budget
which is still lively and colourful; while at the other end of the
budget
scale, the Egg site shows that even the largest firms can embrace
accessibility without compromising their corporate image or losing
any elegance or sophistication from their e-services.

On average, testers found they could complete a set task successfully
90 per cent of the time across the most usable sites. However, this
exercise also contributed its own warning messages about over-
reliance on WAI guidelines. For while these sites did tend to display
fewer WAI checkpoint errors than most of the other sites tested, they
were not the sites that returned the highest 10 scores against the
WAI
guidelines, and others with higher WAI ratings did not feature in the
top 10 list.

However, Brewer said these findings too are not incompatible with
WCAG, which "specifically address accessibility problems that create
the most severe barriers for people with disabilities, not the broad
spectrum of usability issues which affect all users.

"At the same time, WAI has always recognised the importance of
incorporating user testing of accessibility features into a
comprehensive evaluation of the accessibility of web sites; see for
instance the WAI resource suite 'Evaluating web sites for
accessibility'
(http://www.w3.org/WAI/eval)."

WAI is currently working on version 2.0 of WCAG, Brewer said,
which may also address any remaining concerns about version 1.0. "In
WCAG 2.0 we are maintaining some division of priority levels, since
this has proved so helpful to web designers. In addition, we expect
that
reorganisation and re-prioritisation will result in guidelines that
are
shorter, more easily implemented, and more easily tested, while
addressing more advanced web technologies.

"In updating the WAI guidelines, WAI is taking into account feedback
from the broad implementation experience of WCAG 1.0 around the
world, as well as implementation of WAI guidelines for browsers and
authoring tools. WAI . . . welcomes contributions such as the results
of this research".

The new research clearly shows there is a long way to go before even
low-level accessibility standards become the norm on the web.
Developers everywhere will be hoping that the eventual emergence of
WCAG 2.0 will meet their urgent need for a set of simpler, clearer
guidelines to follow than is currently available.

[Section three ends].


++SECTION FOUR: SEMINAR REPORT
- ACCESSIBLE E-GOVERNMENT

+14: DEMOCRATISING THE INFORMATION SOCIETY.
by Julie Hill.

Government departments and local authorities should take a holistic
approach to accessibility when planning the provision of online and
other digital services. This was the message from a recent seminar
hosted by E-Access Bulletin's sister publication E-Government
Bulletin, 'E-Government for all: planning for accessibility'
(http://www.electronic-government.com/access.htm).

Instead of viewing accessibility as being simply about meeting the
needs of disabled user groups, said experts, public bodies should
broaden their thinking to include other groups whose access to online
services might be impaired for a variety of reasons.

"Accessibility is usually promoted in terms of helping disabled users
to use the web," said Tom Adams, senior digital media consultant at the
UK government's technology policy agency the Office of the e-Envoy
(http://www.e-envoy.gov.uk).

"But this is only part of the picture. Accessibility should be
considered
as enabling web use for anyone with a web limiting condition, which
could arise as much from a disability as from technical or
environmental limitations." For example, Adams said that accessible
services also benefit those using older computer equipment, unusual
browsers or those with slow internet connections.

Such a wide view of accessibility is particularly crucial when it
comes
to providing public services, because government has an obligation to
cater for all of its citizens. "While commercial service providers
can target particular sectors, local authorities, for example, have a
duty to
meet the needs of all their residents," said Guido Gybels, director
of new technologies at the Royal National Institute for Deaf People
(http://www.rnid.org.uk).

But government bodies need to factor accessibility into their service
design from the outset, said Adams. Accessibility need not be only
difficult and expensive to achieve, he said, but it will be if it is
not planned into projects from the beginning and organisations find
themselves having to 'retrofit' their web sites. It is therefore
important
to ensure not only that accessibility requirements are well
understood
but that they are seen as an ongoing priority and are an integral
part of
a service's evaluation, he said.

There was consensus about the lack of skills not only among
government commissioning bodies to make judgments about
accessibility, but also among the web developer community. Many
public sector web developers "don't know how to do accessibility and
they have never met a disabled user," said Adams. This lack of
knowledge is not being addressed by the IT education sector, he said,
which appears to be failing to build in accessibility techniques into
its training programmes. Adam cited the example of his son who is
currently doing a degree in multimedia at a London university. He
said that the focus of the course is on creating animated graphics and
accessible web design does not figure at all in the curriculum. When
he offered to go along and talk to the students about accessibility,
they turned him down.

So what factors need to be addressed in order to ensure truly
inclusive
e-government services? The RNID's Gybels outlined three things:
raising awareness of the need for accessibility among public service
providers and web developers; creating a dialogue with user
representatives to feed this awareness; and bringing inclusive design
into the mainstream, so that just as security and interoperability are
considered when developing e-government services, so accessibility is
also a key prerequisite.

The potential prize is huge, said Gybels. "The biggest challenge
facing
e-government - but also the biggest benefit it can bring - is to
transform the information society into a truly inclusive society, one
in which everyone can participate fully as citizens and realise their
potential," he said.

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

