+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 60, DECEMBER 2004.
 
Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).
 
NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details 
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter 
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .
 
 
++Issue 60 Contents.
 
Section One: News.
 
01: Adobe moves to tackle pdf access problems
- but concerns remain over screen reader blocks.
 
02: Call for national taskforce to boost access to reading
- report finds 96 per cent of books are never made accessible.
 
03: Management tool for disability practice is 'world's first'
- organisations can measure progress and plan improvements.
 
04: Winter glut of web access awards
- three types of accolade bestowed on public and private sector bodies.
 
News in brief: 05: Naturally Speaking - Dragon integrates with 
Dolphin; 06: New Dolphin - version 6.03; 07: Asian Fund - cash for 13 
projects; 08: Portable Access - accessible PDA; 09: MaX Benefits - 
web sites for kids.
 
Section Two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
10: Content Question - query on content management systems; 11: TV 
Guide - set-top box research.
 
Section Three: Interview - Judy Brewer.
12: Guardian of the Global Access Standard: Mel Poluck talks to Judy 
Brewer, director of the World Wide Web Consortium's Web 
Accessibility Initiative, about the first major overhaul of international 
web content accessibility guidelines.
 
Section Four: Techshare Conference Report - Low-Cost Accessible 
Computing.
13: Funding the Basics of Modern Life: Many blind people do not have 
high incomes, but even the most basic of properly accessible home 
computing systems can cost a small fortune. Dan Jellinek reports on 
how these costs can be slashed.
 
Section Five: Focus - Future technologies.
14: Too Much Information: Kevin Carey contemplates a world of 
information overload, an increasingly graphical environment, and an 
educational revolution.
 
[Contents ends].
 
 
++Sponsored Notice: J-Say Standard from T and T Consultancy Ltd.
 
J-Say Standard combines the unparalleled flexibility of JAWS for 
Windows with the outstanding voice recognition capabilities of Dragon 
Naturally Speaking Preferred.
 
Imagine being able to:
- Create word processor documents using natural speech;
- Create and process email using your voice;
- Browse the internet using a combination of voice input and keyboard;
- Rapidly move to specific cells within an Excel worksheet;
- Access an interactive help system, manuals and a tutorial;
- Train the speech recognition software to understand your voice, as 
well as having speech-based access to all the features of Dragon 
software.
 
J-Say Standard is ideal for any JAWS user wishing to use voice input 
as an additional means of computer input. For more information please 
contact T&T Consultancy Ltd by telephone on 08452 303015 or email 
on:
enquiries@tandt-consultancy.com .
 
[Sponsored notice ends].
 
 
++Section One: News.
 
+01: Adobe Moves to Tackle PDF Access Problems.
 
Adobe Systems has moved to address severe accessibility problems 
posed by its 'portable document format' (pdf) files, with the release 
this month of a new version of software to create and read the files.
 
The pdf system is a largely graphical way of exchanging and printing 
files, which has often rendered plain text information inaccessible.
 
The new version of Adobe's Acrobat software which creates pdf files 
and Reader software which reads them - version 7.0 - contains several 
new access features. File publishers will find it easier to add 'tags' to 
text, tables and graphical objects, to establish a reading order for files 
in complex layouts. And even if the publishers do not create tags, the 
new version of Reader will try to determine a logical reading order and 
reflow the text into a single block.
 
The new version of Reader also contains an accessibility set-up 
assistant, which detects if a screen-reader being used and asks how the 
user would like to view the files. Other features include better tagging 
of the software's own graphical buttons; and improved help and search 
functions.
 
"In the past, pdf was deemed to be inherently inaccessible," says Greg 
Pisocky, accessibility outreach manager at Adobe Systems. "Now 
we've introduced something that at least makes it easier to modify how 
information is presented. Things are not perfect in Adobe 7.0. Tables 
continue to be the bane of our lives. But we've moved forward."
 
Pisocky unveiled the new features at last month's Techshare 
conference hosted by RNIB (http://www.techshare.org.uk). However, 
some delegates voiced ongoing concerns about certain security features 
of pdf files, which in the process of preventing unauthorised copying 
of files, may lock out some screen-reader users.
 
Steve Tyler, Policy and ICT Access Manager at the RNIB, told 
delegates the existence of a feature which can exclude some screen-
readers could contravene European copyright law which champions 
accessibility.
 
However, Pisocky said the new software did allow 'trusted agent' 
software to access files whatever the security settings. To date, the 
JAWS and WINDOW-EYES screen-readers were the only two to have 
been granted trusted status, but Adobe was open to approaches from 
other providers, he said.
 
 
+02: Call For National Taskforce to Boost Access to Reading.
 
The RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk) is urging the UK government to 
set up a taskforce with blindness charities and publishers to develop a 
national plan for making more ordinary books and reading materials 
accessible to those with sight problems. The government also needs to 
fund new research into the field, the institute says.
 
A recent RNIB report, 'Written Off!', found that some 96 per cent of 
books are never published in formats that people with sight problems 
can read, such as large print, audio or Braille, and that as a result some 
three million people in the UK are being denied the right to read.
 
Digital methods have a lot of potential for integrating mainstream 
publishing with formats that are accessible to blind and visually 
impaired people, the report says. 
 
"In the past, organisations such as the RNIB worked from a paper copy 
of a book to make a voice recording or to scan or key in text to a PC," 
says David Mann, author of the report and RNIB spokesperson for the 
institute's ongoing 'Right to Read' campaign 
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/righttoread). "This was very time-consuming 
and didn't start until after publication. If publishers could provide us 
with content prior to publication and in digital form, it would cut out 
this process. Digital technology also allows different outputs from the 
same 'master', and for the user, formats such as DAISY offer much 
more flexibility to index and bookmark content, for example."
 
The report criticises the UK government for "side-stepping" the issue 
of funding for accessible format production and says that it is 
unreasonable to expect charities to continue to take responsibility for 
producing the bulk of audio and Braille titles.
 
"Charities should not have to subsidise reading for blind people, nor 
can they hope to meet all reading needs from their current resources," 
says Mann. "Publishers can't be expected to operate at a loss. So we 
need substantial and reliable streams of public money to increase our 
storage and production capacity and to set up new working 
arrangements with publishers."
 
The report found that just 2.8 per cent of books are currently made 
available on standard audio cassette, with even fewer in other audio 
formats; 1.5 per cent of titles were available in large print; and 1.9 per 
cent of publications were available in Braille. Such alternative formats 
were also often considerably more expensive than traditional books. 
For example, a full-length audio book might cost over 50 pounds, 
while the equivalent paperback would cost less than 10 pounds.
 
 
+03: Management Tool for Disability Practice is 'World's First.'
 
What is claimed to be the world's first management tool for assessing 
organisations' performance on disability has been launched by a UK 
business body, the Employers' Forum on Disability 
(http://www.employers-forum.co.uk/).
 
The Disability Standard allows private and public sector organisations 
to measure their progress on disability across all areas of their business 
and put in place plans for improvement. Its main component is a 100-
question benchmark survey, covering a whole range of areas such as 
employment, e-commerce, customer care, IT systems and buildings.
 
The service will cost organisations from 2,000 to 8,900 pounds, 
depending on number of employees. Once the benchmark survey is 
completed, it is then scored by the University of Brighton and 
submitted to an independent panel of disability experts, which 
produces a report outlining current risks, areas for improvement and 
required actions.
 
Some 15 questions relate to the accessibility of IT systems to staff and 
customers. For example, there are questions about whether 
organisations devote money and resources to making their internal IT 
systems accessible to staff and their web sites accessible to disabled 
customers; and whether reports and accounts are available in accessible 
electronic formats. The survey is supported by an accompanying guide 
which sets out relevant legislation and codes of practice, and 
organisations are required to submit evidence to support their answers.
 
"Information technology is an important part of the Disability 
Standard, because it is so embedded in the way organisations are run 
and is crucial to how they perform on disability," says Aletheia Gentle, 
project manager for the Disability Standard at the Employers' Forum 
on Disability. "It fundamentally affects how they reach customers, staff 
members and other stakeholders."
 
The Disability Standard was researched and piloted by 15 members of 
the forum, including the bank Abbey, telecoms company Cable & 
Wireless, Royal Mail, the Department for Work and Pensions and the 
Office of the Deputy Prime Minister. Twenty-two organisations have 
signed up to the service and have eight weeks from the beginning of 
February to the end of March 2005 to complete the benchmarking 
exercise.
 
 
+04: Winter Glut of Web Access Awards.
 
Three sets of major awards for accessible web sites were bestowed last 
week.
 
The annual Visionary Design Awards from the National Library for the 
Blind (NLB - www.nlb-online.org), supported by Barclays Bank, 
recognised eight sites out of 100 nominees. They were AbilityNet 
(http://www.abilitynet.org.uk), charity technology supplier for disabled 
people for the voluntary sector; the web site of children's writer Anne 
Fine (http://www.annefine.co.uk); global insurer Aviva 
(http://www.aviva.com); the Disability Rights Commission 
(http://www.drc.org.uk); Henshaws Society for Blind People 
(http://www.henshaws.org.uk), a charity from the North of England; 
Motability (http://www.motability.co.uk), a car scheme for people with 
a disability; Philip Murphy and Associates 
(http://www.philipmurphyassociates.com), a family dental practice; 
and the Transport Archive (http://www.transportarchive.org.uk), a site 
covering British transport history. 
 
Meanwhile, Haringey council's web site (http://www.haringey.gov.uk) 
has been picked as November's accessible site of the month - the first 
in a new series of awards by the Guild of Accessible Web Designers 
(GAWD - http://www.gawds.org).
 
"Because we worked with a specialist web accessibility agency, it 
helped us ensure the site was technically structured to work with a 
range of assistive devices," said Maria Stewart, web development 
manager at Haringey. Residents, including those with a vision 
impairment, were asked to test the site and submit their ideas.
 
GAWD is now taking nominations for December's site of the month - 
anyone can register a vote (see 
http://www.gawds.org/poll/index.php?poll=4).
 
Finally, the Cancer Research web site 
(http://www.cancerresearchuk.org) came first in the accessibility and 
usability category of last month's British Interactive Media Awards 
(BIMA - http://www.bima.co.uk). Second and third places went to the 
business support group Business Link 
(http://www.businesslink.gov.uk) and Imperial Tobacco 
(http://www.imperial-tobacco.com/).
 
 
++News in Brief:
 
+05: Naturally Speaking: A software package has been launched that 
integrates the voice recognition solution Dragon Naturally Speaking 
with Dolphin's Supernova screen magnifier and Hal screen reader. 
'Nova-Link,' was developed by T and T Consultancy in association 
with UK technology company Dolphin Computer Access, who claim it 
has an accuracy rate of over 90 per cent:
http://www.tandt-consultancy.com .
 
+06: New Dolphin: Meanwhile version 6.03 of the Dolphin Computer 
Access software suite including Supernova, Hal and the Lunar and 
LunarPlus screen magnifiers has been released. New features will 
allow users to enter details on forms more easily and to make 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet software easier to handle:
http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/news/2004/603_release.htm .
 
+07: Asian Fund: Some 550,000 dollars of funding has been awarded 
to 13 local organisations in south-east Asia, for projects that use 
technology to improve the lives of people with a disability. Recipients 
of cash from the 'DigitAll Hope' scheme funded by electronics giant 
Samsung Asia include a 'Picture-to-speech communicator' from 
Singapore Polytechnic:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/asia2 .
 
+08: Portable Access: A fully accessible Personal Digital Assistant 
(PDA), which can be used with a wireless Braille or standard 
keyboard, has been developed by Canadian assistive technology 
company VisuAide. The company aims to integrate Global Positioning 
Satellite technology with the 'Maestro' device in a future version:
http://www.visuaide.com/news_maestro2_en.html .
 
+09: MaX Benefits: A new version of the online web-site-building 
software 'MaX' allows both sighted and vision-impaired children and 
adults to create their own accessible site for free. The sites are created 
live online, and hosted by the software's creator, Danish company the 
Sonokids Foundation. The system is compatible with Braille keyboards 
and screen readers and available in English, Dutch and Danish. A 
version for blind schools is available. For a MaX account email:
max@sonokids.com . 
 
[Section One ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Register now for Vision 2005 London
- the world's premier event on low vision and sight loss.
 
Vision 2005 London will be the most wide-ranging conference and 
exhibition ever held on low vision and sight loss.
 
The programme will cover six themes, including 'Advances in 
technology: designing and constructing for an inclusive environment'. 
Presentations, posters and round table discussions will explore new 
legislation and its impact on inclusive design, web accessibility, 
technology specifications, DAISY and high-tech devices.
 
Register before 6 January to obtain an early-bird discount for the full 
four-day conference. Day delegates will still obtain a discount if they 
register before 17 February.
 
To register and find our more, visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/vision2005 .
 
[Special Notice ends].
 
 
++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.
 
Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .
 
+10: Content Question: E-Access Bulletin's own technician Nick 
Apostolidis would be interested in hearing from any reader with 
knowledge of a content management system that produces content 
accessible to the JAWS screen reader. "I also want the administration 
of the system to be easy to use and to provide good accessibility. I 
would be grateful if someone that worked with one and is happy with 
the way it works could let me know about it," he says.
 
"I have had two systems recommended to me and I would like to hear 
from anyone who knows how accessible they are or if you know of one 
that is better.
 
"The first is called Plone (http://www.plone.org). It is built using 
another tool called Zope (http://www.zope.org). Plone claims to create 
pages that follow the WAI guidelines and it seems to be accessible. 
The second one is called Mambo (http://www.mamboserver.com). this 
seems OK but I have found its admin pages to be a bit unfriendly. 
Thanks for any information provided." Responses please to 
inbox@headstar.com.
 
 
+11: TV Guide: A team of researchers at Bournemouth University is 
looking to find out about vision-impaired people's television-watching 
behaviour, to inform the development of an accessible digital 
television set-top box. They aim to have the prototype built by June 
2005. Readers are invited to take part in a survey by calling 0845 22 60 
228 (charged at local rates) or by completing an online questionnaire 
at:
http://www.atv-survey.org.uk .
 
[Section Two ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.
 
Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to 
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site 
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility 
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum 
software itself.
 
All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and 
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Three: Interview
- Judy Brewer.
 
+12: Guardian of the Global Access Standard
by Mel Poluck.
 
"In an area where the pace of technology is so rapid, lost ground is not 
easily made up. We need a continuation of the good work of 
organisations involved in developing web solutions, so that the web 
can move forward as a technology that serves all."
 
These were the words of web accessibility pioneer Judy Brewer, as she 
presented the case for increasing the accessibility of all web sites to a 
US House of Representatives' sub-committee on the Constitution.
 
That was back in 2000, but her words are just as relevant today. 
Brewer is director of the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI - 
http://www.w3.org/WAI), one of four main work areas of the global 
World Wide Web Consortium, a grouping of several hundred 
organisations across the world which upholds the standards of the web.
 
At WAI, Brewer's remit includes ensuring technologies support 
accessibility; developing accessibility guidelines; improving tools for 
evaluation and repair of web sites; conducting education and outreach 
on web accessibility; and monitoring research and development which 
may impact future accessibility of the web. But she also oversees 
development of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG - 
http://www.w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT), the benchmarks used 
to measure the accessibility of web sites against a series of checkpoints 
grouped in three priority levels: 'A,' 'AA' and 'AAA' 
(http://www.w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT/#Conformance).
 
The guidelines were first released in 1999. Now, web developers and 
disability organisations are waiting with bated breath for the release of 
WCAG version 2.0 - the first ever major overhaul of the guidelines - a 
draft of which is currently under development for release during 2005 
(for a current working draft, see http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20).
 
What will the major changes be compared with WCAG 1.0? "One of 
the biggest changes is to ensure more precise testing criteria," said 
Brewer, speaking to E-Access Bulletin after delivering the keynote 
address to the RNIB's Techshare conference in Birmingham last 
month. "The question of evaluation is interesting from many 
perspectives. When WCAG 1.0 came out we had less robust testing 
requirements for the guidelines. In some cases it's not clear how to test 
for a given checkpoint," she said.
 
However, she warned against over-reliance on automated software 
checks for accessibility, either now or in the future. . "Most people will 
say 'I passed the majority of tests - I'm going to slap a logo on my 
site.' That doesn't reflect how well it will work for people with a 
disability," Brewer said. "By and large automated testing tools can 
help with the evaluation of large web sites but they may miss an 
accessibility barrier. Experts use multiple tools," she said. "With 
WCAG 2.0 we're expecting that more precise testing criteria will fuel 
development of a more precise set of tools."
 
She also said that the working group is focusing more on access issues 
for people with cognitive difficulties. "Cognitive difficulties have been 
important to home in on - we expect that support for these will 
improve," Brewer said.
 
Brewer says that there are advantages in using a common set of 
W3C/WAI guidelines in any country that is developing a web 
accessibility policy. "There is still a tendency in some countries to say 
'web accessibility is great, let's develop our own guidelines.' 
Disabilities are similar in different countries so you need the same 
functionality - standards harmonisation benefits everybody," Brewer 
said.
 
The WCAG system has been at the centre of controversy in the UK 
recently after this year's on the findings of what was claimed to be the 
largest ever investigation into web site accessibility by the Disability 
Rights Commission (DRC - http://www.drc-gb.org). The survey 
involved the testing of 1,000 UK sites by researchers at City 
University, London.
 
While the report found that WCAG improved usability, it said the 
guidelines were overly complex, and suggested that there were many 
barriers to accessibility which were not yet covered by WAI 
guidelines. "We've gone backwards and forwards through the available 
data for that survey," Brewer said. "We found that almost all (95 per 
cent) of barriers noted in the survey were covered by WAI guidelines -
- the great majority by WCAG, and the rest by the User Agent 
Accessibility Guidelines, which address browser accessibility."
 
Brewer also noted that only a very small number of sites in the survey 
actually conformed to WCAG, so it is difficult to draw conclusions 
about the usability of WCAG-conformant sites for people with 
disabilities from this survey. "This raises another interesting policy 
question - why are so few sites in the UK accessible for people with 
disabilities, and what would change that?"
 
[Section Three ends].
 
 
++Section Four: Techshare Conference Report
- Low-Cost Accessible Computing.
 
+13: Funding the Basics of Modern Life
by Dan Jellinek.
 
Many ordinary people with sight problems do not have high incomes, 
and lack access to grants for computer equipment and special access 
technologies such as screen readers that might enhance their lives in 
many ways.
 
If someone needs to use technology for their work, there are usually 
ways of funding it. And if someone has a particular interest in 
computers, they usually find a way too. But for people with no special 
interest or knowledge, and no pressing need to access computers for 
work or other reasons, it can be hard to fund access to what for most 
people is nevertheless a basic part of modern life: a simple home 
computer, with access to email, the web, and word processing.
 
A typical cost for a standard accessible home computing set-up for a 
blind person is in the region of some 2,600 pounds, according to a 
detailed estimate presented by RNIB officers to last month's Techshare 
conference (http://www.techshare.org.uk).
 
Mary Steiner, RNIB Technology Officer, said this cost includes a PC 
(personal computer); a printer; Microsoft Officer software for word 
processing and other basic tasks; special access software such as a 
screen reader to convert text into speech or Braille; and a scanner with 
scanning software to allow users to scan and digitise text using 'optical 
character recognition' (OCR).
 
For low vision users the cost is lower, as they may simply need screen 
magnifying software instead of a screen reader and scanning 
equipment, but will still end up in the region of 1,325 pounds, Steiner 
said.
 
But need costs really be this high? Over the course of the session, 
Steiner and her colleague Richard Orme, RNIB Assistant Director for 
ICT Services, looked at each component of these accessible systems in 
turn to see how costs could be minimised or even driven out 
completely, resulting in alternative systems that offered similar 
functionality for far lower prices.
 
For example, many blind or vision-impaired people pay 1,000 pounds 
or more for computers bought through specialist firms that also supply 
them with access technology, since these arrive with access technology 
conveniently installed, and they can often receive specialist post-sales 
support as well.
 
But a basic home computer with a good enough specification for 
normal activities such as web browsing and word processing, and 
enough power to run access technology as well, can cost a lot less than 
this if it is bought from a mainstream supplier such as Dell. These 
suppliers are usually running a special offer of the month at any given 
time that can be around half the cost of a specialist supplier: for 
example, Dell has a current offer of a PC with an acceptable 
specification at less than 500 pounds, Orme said.
 
Of course, a PC bought this way will not come with access software 
already loaded onto it for you, or with ongoing support for access 
technologies. But this need not be a problem, as many specialist 
suppliers of screen readers and other access software will offer you 
installation support by telephone and ongoing help even if all you are 
buying from them is the software, Orme said.
 
As far as word processing software is concerned, most people do not 
need all parts of the suites of Microsoft Office software that they are 
sold, Orme said. 'Office Basic' - which offers Word, Excel (for 
spreadsheets) and Outlook - was good enough for most people, and is 
cheaper than other editions of Office such as the commonly pre-
installed 'Small Business' version.
 
But if people want to cut costs even further, they could simply use the 
'WordPad' text editor software that comes free with every version of 
Windows, he said. This does not have most of the sophisticated 
interactive functions of Word, but has enough to handle most simple 
word processing tasks like writing letters. You can also find free 
software additions to WordPad such as spellcheckers which add in 
some of the missing functions. "So the cost is reduced to zero!" Orme 
said.
 
For screen reader software, there are various products out there that are 
far cheaper than the market-leading products such as JAWS. Connect 
Outloud from Freedom Scientific is a pared-down version of JAWS, at 
around a quarter of the price; LookOut from Choice costs 105 pounds; 
and Narrator comes free with Windows.
 
For screen magnifiers, BigShot from AI Squared and Magnice from 
Choice (packaged with LookOut as 'Dual') are low-cost; and Lunar 
Lite from Dolphin and Magnifier which comes with Windows are free 
solutions.
 
There are also cheaper scanning software products, he said, which do 
not have as many features as the commonly purchased high-end 
products like Kurzweil 1000 but are good enough for most purposes. 
For example Cicero from Dolphin is several hundred pounds cheaper. 
As for optical character recognition software, which converts scanned 
images to digital text, you can use software that comes in free trial 
versions on many computer magazine coverdisks  such as FineReader.
 
Taking all these money-saving options together, it is possible to reduce 
the cost of an accessible home computer system to as little as 695 
pounds for a blind person and 640 pounds for someone with impaired 
vision, savings of almost 2,000 pounds and 700 pounds respectively on 
a typical 'state of the art' specification.
 
Furthermore, the use of cheaper products did not necessarily mean a 
poorer user experience, Orme said. "Many of the low cost products do 
have sophisticated functionality."
 
It may be possible to make even greater savings by buying a second-
hand or recycled PC, he said, although there was no evidence that it 
was cheaper to build your own PC. "I build my own so I can use the 
components I want, to customise, but it is not cheaper."
 
It was also not yet the case that using the free operating system Linux 
was a viable option to Windows if one wants to create an accessible 
environment, Orme said. It was simply too complex a task. "I have 
tried four times to install Linux and create an accessible system, but 
have failed every time, and I have worked for 15 years in the access 
technology industry and build my own PCs," he said. "It may be an 
option one day - but not this year."
 
[Section Four ends].
 
 
++Section Five: Focus
- Future technologies.
 
+14: Too Much Information
by Kevin Carey.
 
Up until the end of the seventeenth century, 250 years after the 
invention of the printing press, a truly learned man could read in his 
lifetime everything written that was worth reading. Now information is 
being created and aggregated in such large amounts that it is 
sometimes referred to in units designated as LOCs, or Libraries of 
Congress - the equivalent of the entire contents of the US Library of 
Congress, or 20 million megabytes each. Until quite recently, that 
accumulation was accounted for by text, hypertext and low resolution 
graphics. That is now expanding still further with the explosion of high 
resolution graphics and DVD.
 
At the same time the graphic environment, once limited to engraving 
and painting, expanded into cinema and television, and is on the verge 
of becoming ubiquitous. Soon our environment will, literally, be 
plastered with pictures: short movies and adverts on the walls of 
underground train tunnels; audio visual messages in shop windows 
triggered by the footfall of passers-by; laser graffiti on every flat 
architectural surface. This massive visual assault may drive our sighted 
brothers and sisters mad with over-stimulation, but it might also drive 
us blind people mad with frustration.
 
We already know how mobile phones have changed our lives but 
enhanced wireless connectivity will mean that the norm will be for our 
personal devices to be always switched on; indeed, if we're switched 
off people will automatically assume that we are committing adultery. 
This means that the pressure on our time will increase, that decisions 
will have to be taken more quickly and the line between work and 
leisure will be even further eroded. 
 
On the other hand, the environment we live in will be much easier: 
every building and even every door handle will have a device that can 
talk to our personal navigating receiver; doors will recognise us, 
encourage us to enter and open themselves; robotic devices will be 
safer, cleaner and more flexible than guide dogs. Flexible technology 
will also mean that almost any object can become a flat screen so that 
people with limited vision can use their personal device for receiving 
data which can then be projected onto a wall or table top in their 
preferred colour and size.
 
Perhaps it will be some compensation for the lack of visual information 
that 3D printers will produce much cheaper and much more accurate 
models of anything we want to touch. Indeed, I sometimes imagine a 
world where 3D printers will make the parts for 3D printers!
 
By this time, the whole structure of formal education is likely to have 
broken down and vision-impaired children will be freed from the 
straitjacket of a rigid curriculum; anything digital, including letters in 
graphics file, will be available in any kind of print and every kind of 
Braille. The internet and broadcasting will merge and the key skill will 
be defining a search for massive search engines. Except for the 
pictures, we will be able to have any information we want.
 
The key cultural question we cannot yet answer for the future is what 
role the picture will play in our overall lives; how much will society be 
able to take? In the meantime, however, the steady expansion of radio, 
the growth of broadband and the natural fit between the information 
needs of blind people and motorists and the explosion of weblogs all 
point in the direction of a healthy market for interesting audio data. 
 
Finally, here is an interesting thought; in an era of massive data 
overload there might just be an advantage in being information-
rationed, leaving space for reflection and the opportunity for 
perspective. We might yet realise society's stereotype of blind people 
as prophets with a sixth sense.
 
[Section Five ends].
 
 
++End Notes.
 
+How to Receive the Bulletin.
 
To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To 
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.
 
Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .
 
Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this 
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always 
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also 
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of 
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken 
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web 
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.
 
+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Technician - Nick Apostolidis
Marketing Director - Claire Clinton
Marketing Assistant - Katie Wilkinson
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.
 
ISSN 1476-6337 .
 
[Issue ends.]
