+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 55, JULY 2004.
 
Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).
 
NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .
 
 
++ISSUE 55 CONTENTS.
 
01: Supermarket web sites fail basic checks
- Just one in five offers accessible service.
 
02: Personal navigation system to be tested in Finland
- Technologies combined to offer information on the move.
 
03: UN employment programme announced for Ethiopia
- Technology skills training for vision-impaired.
 
04: Satellite audio description service to cover all channels
- Mainstream TV to be accessible to millions.
 
News in Brief: 05: Digital hope - Asian support schemes; 06:
Accessible telephony - Singaporean call centre; 07: Handheld pioneer
- tactile computer launched.
 
Section two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Double plight - developing world issues; 09: Money talks -
banking tips; 10: Bridge building - card games; 11: Validator defence
- HTML checking tool; 12: Audio demand - web leaflets.
 
Section three: Interview - Paul Blenkhorn.
13: Life on the front line: Mel Poluck talks to an academic and
entrepreneur who has been designing and making assistive technology
for 20 years, including some of the world's best-known software tools,
and is still going strong.
 
Section four: - Opinion - Access to knowledge.
14: The weight of evidence: All the research shows that people with
impaired vision are struggling to access education, training and
employment resources in the modern age. Kevin Carey says the
voluntary sector must be funded to play a greater assistive role.
 
[Contents ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Access Technology Sector Marketeer Wanted
 
The publishers of E-Access Bulletin are seeking a freelance marketing
executive with experience of the disability and technology
communities to help develop a new conference project later this year.
 
Please email CVs and details of current work/rates of pay to Dan
Jellinek on dan@headstar.com .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++SECTION ONE: NEWS.
 
+01: Supermarket Web Sites Fail Basic Checks.
 
Only one of the UK's top five supermarkets has a web site that meets
even the most basic accessibility needs of disabled consumers, a survey
by the charity AbilityNet (http://www.abilitynet.org) has found.
 
'State of the e-nation: online supermarkets' is an audit of web sites
operated by Asda, Morrisons, Sainsburys, Somerfield and Tesco. Each
site was tested for usability and accessibility using Watchfire's
'Bobby' software (http://bobby.watchfire.com) and a range of manual
checks. The sites were then ranked on a five-star scale, where one star
signifies "very inaccessible" and five stars mean "very accessible."
 
The highest score of four stars went to Tesco's 'alternative' site -
http://www.tesco.com/access - which was the only site that could be
easily accessed by those with visual impairments, dyslexia or a
physical disability. Asda (http://www.asda.co.uk), Morrisons
(http://www.morereasons.co.uk) and Sainsburys
(http://www.sainsburys.co.uk) scored one star each, while Somerfield
(http://www.somerfield.co.uk) and Tesco's mainstream site
(http://www.tesco.com) fared marginally better with two stars.
 
Common problems encountered by AbilityNet's researchers included
"hard-coded" text which could not be enlarged; a lack of text labels for
images; and the use of JavaScript mini-programmes which aren't
recognised by some older browsers or by some of the specialist
browsers used by the visually impaired.
 
The report praised Somerfield for having the "most accessible of the
'mainstream' supermarket web sites." However, its site is not e-
commerce enabled and so doesn't offer the convenience of online
shopping for disabled users, said the report.
 
"We are quite pleased with our two-star ranking, which is better than
some of the other supermarket sites," said Nicholas Hall, marketing
controller at Somerfield. "But we don't think we should be harshly
judged for not offering an e-commerce site. It is a deliberate part of our
strategy not to be an e-commerce operation, because we are a local
high-street retailer that encourages people to physically visit our stores.
We aren't like some of the larger supermarkets who often have stores
out of town and are more suited to an e-commerce offering."
 
Asda, Morrisons, Sainsburys and Somerfield have made pledges to
improve the accessibility of their sites. The report says that by having
inaccessible sites, the supermarkets are missing out on a market of over
seven million people with an estimated spending power of 120 billion
pounds a year.
 
 
+02: Personal Navigation System to be Tested in Finland.
 
Testing of a personal navigation system for blind and vision-impaired
people will begin this summer in the Finnish cities of Helsinki and
Tampere.
 
The system, called NOPPA, has been developed by the Technical
Research Centre of Finland (VTT - http://www.vtt.fi), a government-
owned agency. It combines mobile phone, wireless internet, global
positioning system (GPS) and voice technologies to guide users around
town and to help them use public transport. It is part of a 465,000 euro,
three-year pilot, funded by the Finnish Ministry of Transport and
Communications
(http://www.mintc.fi/www/sivut/english/default.html), the Arla
Institute (http://www.arlainst.fi/englisht.htm) and the Finnish
Federation of the Visually Impaired (http://www.nkl.fi/english).
 
The navigation system uses a 3G mobile phone with GPRS (General
Packet Radio Service) and Bluetooth connectivity, coupled with a GPS
device. It connects to public transport information, such as timetables
and municipal route plans, which can be queried using speech
recognition and production software.
 
"Our specially designed information server acts as the interpreter
between the services available and the user," says Ari Virtanen,
research scientist at VTT. "It handles the speech interface and does all
the hard work of relaying users' queries to the services and feeding
back the response."
 
The result is that a blind or vision-impaired person can use the system
to plan their trip with real-time access to bus, train and tram timetables,
as well as up-to-date information about roadworks and possible
obstacles. The system can also guide them to their relevant public
transport stop, inform them when the vehicle arrives and tell them
where to get off. The idea is that it acts as a complement to rather than
a replacement for a guide dog or white stick.
 
NOPPA will be formally evaluated by blind and visually impaired
users from August to September 2004. However, VTT says that the
system is also suitable for guiding people with normal eyesight or
people who travel a lot for their work. Although VTT isn't a
commercial organisation, its research often forms the basis of
marketable products and Vitanen is confident that the product has a
commercial future. "I think that NOPPA will be in common usage in
the next five to ten years," he says.
 
 
+03: UN Employment Programme Announced for Ethiopia.
 
A training programme to create employment opportunities for people
with visual disabilities in Ethiopia is set to be launched by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO -
http://www.unesco.org).
 
The programme will be delivered in partnership with the Adaptive
Technology Centre for the Blind (ATCB -
http://www3.sympatico.ca/tamru), an Ethiopian organisation which
conducts training with adaptive technology for the country's vision-
impaired community. According to its latest census figures, Ethiopia
has some 500,000 blind people, while Africa has the majority of the
world's 45 million blind people, according to the International Eye
Foundation (http://www.iefusa.org).
 
UNESCO and ATCB have been working together since 2003, when
they jointly established a computer training centre for people with
impaired vision in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa. This latest
project will set up an employment-oriented training centre for the
visually impaired, develop a training curriculum and train at least 50
people with a view to them gaining jobs using their ICT skills.
 
The employment project is one of UNESCO's contributions to the
realisation of the action plan drawn up by the UN's recent World
Summit on the Information Society (http://www.itu.int/wsis), which
highlighted the need for ensuring access to ICTs by disadvantaged
groups. "ICTs offer individuals the ability to . . . access knowledge by
adapting digital media to the nature of their disabilities and to enhance
their social and economic integration in communities by enlarging the
scope of activities available to them," said a UNESCO statement. It is
hoped that these projects will act as a model for other similar initiatives
in Africa.
 
 
+04: Satellite Audio Description Service to Cover All Channels.
 
Vision-impaired users of the UK's satellite TV service Sky will soon
be able to receive audio-described programmes across all mainstream
channels, after the BBC, ITV and Channel 4 announced they are to
begin supporting the service from early autumn.
 
Until now, Britain's seven million Sky customers have only had access
to audio description on Sky One, Five, and Sky's premiere Movie,
Sports and Travel channels but they will now be able to receive audio
described programmes on BBC1, BBC2, BBC3, BBC4, Cbeebies,
CBBC, ITV1, ITV2 and Channel 4 by setting the set top box to
"narrative" mode from the language menu.
 
However, users of the service will not be able to alter the volume of the
audio description - which will be audible to everybody in the room
because there is no way of isolating it - meaning it could potentially be
drowned out by other noise. RNIB campaigns officer for accessible
information Julianne Marriot welcomed the development but said it
was "a more cheap and cheerful method" than the fully accessible
Netgem set top box (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 49, January 2004 and
issue 51, March 2004).
 
The RNIB is also continuing to campaign for an increase from 10 per
cent of the government-set targets for the proportion of all programmes
that are required to be audio-described. The institute is also calling for
Sky to broadcast on the same system as the BBC-led digital terrestrial
service Freeview in the future because it says it is technically superior,
allowing users to listen to audio description using headphones and to
adjust the volume. It is also trying to persuade cable platforms
Telewest and ntl to provide audio-description through their set-top
boxes.
 
Meanwhile the broadcasting regulator Ofcom
(http://www.ofcom.org.uk), has drawn up a draft code on subtitling,
signing and audio description, due to be published later this month.
The body has a duty under the 2003 Communications Act to encourage
manufacturers to develop equipment which can be easily used by
people with disabilities.
 
 
++NEWS IN BRIEF:
 
+05: DIGITAL HOPE: The Digital Hope 2004 programme providing
cash, products and facilities to non-governmental, educational and
research organisations' technology projects benefiting disabled people
is being launched in seven Asian countries by electronics firm
Samsung:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/hope1 .
Meanwhile, Microsoft has teamed up with Indonesian welfare body
Yayasan Mitra Netra to set up five computer training centres for the
vision-impaired as part of a 8.7 million dollar scheme to raise
computer literacy in Asia:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/asia1 .
 
+06: ACCESSIBLE TELEPHONY: The Singapore Association of the
Visually Handicapped is to implement an internet-enabled call centre
accessible to vision-impaired workers. The system, developed with
communications company Avaya Singapore and Radiance
Communications, allows users to hear caller identity; determine which
callers are on hold; and see how many calls are queued:
http://www.savh.org.sg/news/article5.html .
 
+07: ACCESSIBLE PDA: An accessible handheld computer for
vision-impaired users has been launched by Canadian assistive
technology company VisuAide which uses text-to-speech technology
and a tactile keyboard membrane over a touch screen. The 'Maestro' is
said to be the first accessible handheld computer available on the
mainstream and allows users to perform text and vocal note taking and
Braille input among others:
http://www.visuaide.com/news_maestro_en.html .
 
[Section one ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Techshare 2004 Call for Papers
- 18-19 November 2004, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK
 
The RNIB's Techshare 2004 conference is an important event for
professionals who are interested in technology and the role it plays in
learning, work and society for people with sight problems.
 
We are currently looking for people to give presentations in the
following areas: Practical applications of technology; Innovation in
education; Accessible web authoring; IT training; Broadcasting and
digital information delivery; Mobile technology; Producing alternative
formats; Technology in the workplace; Access to operating systems.
 
If you are interested in presenting, please email techshare@rnib.org.uk
for more information on the format of submissions. The closing date
for submissions is 2 August.
 
Speakers will be entitled to a reduced rate when registering for the
conference of 130 pounds (or 95 pounds for one day). Speakers and
delegates will also have the opportunity to have an informal exhibit at
a 'Delegate's showcase' table in the conference coffee area at a cost of
40 pounds per table per day.
 
For further information including standard attendance prices, email
techshare@rnib.org.uk or visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Two: The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.
 
Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .
 
+08: DOUBLE PLIGHT: DPM Weerakkody, Professor of Western
Classics at the University of Peradeniya in Sri Lanka, writes in with
advice for our recent correspondent who wrote asking for advice on
affordable access products on behalf of a nurse whose 13-year-old son
Rafail is blind.
 
"The sad plight of Rafail is, unfortunately, the same plight of all
vision-impaired people in the so-called 'Third World'," he says. "We
are doubly handicapped by being blind as well as by being born in the
Third World. We very much wish to be computer-literate, and there is
no doubt that computers can contribute to our education and
employment prospects. But we cannot afford the colossal sums
required to buy the access software. I have a few suggestions for
Rafail, but these may not be all that satisfactory.
 
"First, obtain a demonstration version of [the screenreader] JAWS, or
Window-Eyes, or HAL, which will allow him to use the computer for
30 or so minutes at one time. Second, install Windows 3.1 and
download JAWS 2.0 free of charge. Finally, there are some less
expensive screen readers, such as Lookout, but I have not tried them,
so I do not know how useful they are. There are also some Indian
programmes which are either free or cost little. Obviously, all these
suggestions have their drawbacks, and none of them may be totally
satisfying."
 
NOTE: For a feature by Professor Weerakkody on access to
technology in the developing world see 'Divided we stand', E-Access
Bulletin, issue 34, October 2002.
 
 
+09: MONEY TALKS: Further to our recent piece on accessibility
issues with the new 'Chip and PIN' credit card system and many
banks' failure to explain the alternatives, Clare Page writes: "I have
just read [your] article about the problems with the alternative to typing
in a PIN number when using a UK credit card. I am curious as to why
there should be a problem with typing in a PIN number, or the need for
an alternative.
 
"Ever since I have lived in France, anyone here with a credit card has
had a PIN number, which can be used in any place where the card is
accepted. I use a French credit card myself, and when I type in my PIN
number, the only problem I sometimes have is knowing where the
button to validate it is: although the numbers on the keypads here are
usually in the same order on every pad, the pads themselves are not
standardised, so the "validate" button is not always in the same
position.
 
"So I am curious to know what prevents visually impaired British
credit card holders from using their PIN numbers to make purchases as
the French do?"
 
And Amar Latif, Senior Financial Analyst at BT Global Services, has
another query about accessible banking, as well as some valuable tips
about how to make the banks do your bidding: "I am registered blind,
and do not use Braille. The banks have said they can send out an audio
cassette with my statement. However, I have told them that this is such
an inconvenient medium.
 
"Now that blind people use computers, it would be so simple to receive
your statement on email. This way, it would be easy to analyse.
However, they say this would be insecure. My answer to that has been
that we don't need our account number on the email, just a list of
transactions. They then say this is not technically possible, which I find
very hard to believe. I have been chasing banks to provide this service
for the past two years. I am getting very frustrated and wonder if
something can be done collectively.
 
"I receive my credit card statements on email. Even they had given me
the same reasons as the banks, however, they do now provide the
statement less the account details. I achieved this by running a 3,000
pound balance on my credit cards, and then demanding that I needed a
suitable medium to read my statement before paying them off. Now I
receive this and it is wonderful.
 
"Many banks mention that you can access their statements online.
However, as we all know, it takes time logging onto the site, working
out what you need to download and so on. If sighted people still
receive their statements through their letterbox, then it is unfair that we
have to go online; we need ours in our inbox.
 
"Your views on how this can be taken forward would be very much
appreciated. In addition, are you able to ask your readers if they would
prefer this medium, to judge how many people may be in the same
boat as me?" [Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].
 
 
+10: BRIDGE BUILDING: In a recent issue a reader asked for
information on an accessible computer game  version of the card game
Bridge, and our regular correspondent Chris McMillan writes: "I don't
play bridge, sighted or otherwise, but I did a quick search [which]
revealed an upgrade for a game called 3D Bridge Deluxe (see
http://news.freeverse.com/archives/000417.php)."
 
Chris also suggested that our reader contact Tom Lorimer of
Whitestick, who "probably knows more about accessible games than
anyone else in the UK. He certainly has written lots over the years
himself. He also has links on his web site
(http://www.whitestick.co.uk) to lots of other games sites and
magazines."
 
 
+11: VALIDATOR DEFENCE: Bart Simons, Web Accessibility
Specialist at the Belgian e-government solutions firm ASCii, writes in
to defend the World Wide Web Consortium's HTML Validator
(http://validator.w3.org/) which our reader Karina Gregory found
"incredibly difficult to use" (see inbox, previous issue).
 
He says: "I really don't see the problem here. I use that validator daily.
I am blind and use JAWS. If a page is valid you know this by pressing
'h' twice and you'll land on the message "this page is valid". If there
are errors you just press 'l' to access the list of errors. The page can't
be called inaccessible. I would point to the W3C WAI interest group
(http://www.w3.org/WAI/IG/) if Karina likes to discuss this issue."
 
 
+12: AUDIO DEMAND: John Loader of DotSix Brailling Services
writes in for information about audio versions of leaflets available on
demand over the web. "I run a not-for-profit Braille, audio, large print
and tactile diagram company and, with the advent of broadband, I feel
that there is scope for organisations like councils, rather than get me to
produce umpteen tapes for leaflets, newsletters and so on, to have a
recording on their website for either audio streaming or straight file
download. Is anyone doing this that I can consult on what is necessary?
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].
 
[Section two ends].
 
 
++SPECIAL NOTICE: WEB ACCESSIBILITY FORUM.
 
Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.
 
All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Three: Interview
- Paul Blenkhorn.
 
+12: Life on the Front Line
by Mel Poluck.
 
Paul Blenkhorn, professor of assistive technology at the University of
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), is no out-
of-touch academic. His work at UMIST is practical and focused on the
real world, like all his work in a 20-year career which has seen him
create some of the most widely-used assistive technology tools in the
world.
 
Blenkhorn started his career in the early 1980s working with vision-
impaired children as a research fellow at the Research Centre for the
Visually Handicapped in Birmingham, now the Visual Impairment
Centre for Teaching and Research (VICTAR -
http://www.education.bham.ac.uk/research/victar). Together with a
colleague Eamonn Fetton, now RNIB's director of education and
employment, he drove a minibus to every school for blind children in
the country, demonstrating software; gleaning ideas from teachers and
pupils and helping to produce a termly newsletter for communication
aids for disabled children.
 
"In those days, there were two BBC Micros [a type of early desktop
computer made by Acorn] per school: but it's not those sort of pioneer
years any more," he says.
 
Then in 1986, after leaving the Birmingham research centre, Blenkhorn
created a piece of access technology history: "I started a company with
a friend called Dolphin (http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/)." He went on to
design what have become some of the household names in the world of
assistive technologies including the Apollo speech synthesiser and the
screen-reader packages HAL and Narrator
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/narrator1), of which the latter is now used
in every Windows 2000 and Windows XP package, and is the
invention of which Blenkhorn says he is most proud.
 
On leaving Dolphin in 1991, he went back to academia and took up a
post at UMIST, where he was made professor of assistive technology
three years ago. During this time, he has worked mainly on assistive
technology for people with a print impairment which covers those with
dyslexia as well as those with a vision impairment.
 
Blenkholrn's work spreads beyond the UK. Alva, the Braille devices
company based in the Netherlands uses a Braille translation tool
developed by Blenkhorn for their mobile phone.
And he is currently working through UMIST with Spanish blindness
organisation ONCE on a partnership project beginning in January
called 'Red de solidaridad con los ciegos de América Latina (Red
Social - 'solidarity network for blind organisations of South America')
in  Columbia; Cuba; Guatemala; Mexico; and Peru. The scheme is
designed to encourage people in those countries to use screen readers
and other assistive technologies and to campaign to make them
affordable. Software will be translated into Spanish and indigenous
languages such as Maya.
 
Last week, Blenkhorn met with representatives of the Association of
the Blind of Prizren, Kosovo after the body received government
funding for a project starting in August. He is planning the building of
an Albanian screen reader.
 
Having been in the business of assistive technology for two decades
that have seen a particularly rapid rate of development, what does
Blenkhorn see as the biggest changes in the field? "The biggest change
reflects society and charities. For me, most of what I see out there is
about business, not users: the focus has shifted. Everything now has a
cost and not necessarily a value."
 
In an attempt to redress the balance, and return control to the hands of
users, Blenkhorn has set up a new company called Sensory Software
(http://sonantsoft.com/sensory) whose 'LookOUT' screenreader sells
in the UK for around 80 pounds compared with more usual
screenreader costs of between 400 and 900 pounds. This and the
company's other products are designed to be extremely simple, he
says, since 95 per cent of people with low vision don't need very much
in terms of different functions. In fact, the goal for him in designing a
screen reader was to make the user interface straightforward. "There's
a real need for simple, straightforward [products] for ordinary people
to use. It's not about ivory tower research, it's about getting it out
there."
 
[Section three ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.
 
Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.
 
Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search-engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.
 
For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Four: Opinion
- Access to knowledge.
 
+14: The Weight of Evidence
by Kevin Carey.
 
Recent research by Zoe Neumann of the RNIB showed that people
with impaired vision using web-based educational materials spend 70
per cent of their time faffing about (my term, not hers) and only 30 per
cent of their time directly using the resources (see E-Access Bulletin,
issue 53, May 2004). This finding fits grimly with separate Disability
Rights Commission research which found that of all disability groups,
blind people show the lowest rates of task completion on the web at 53
per cent, compared with an average for all disabilities of 76 per cent.
 
Both these findings also fit with a third lot of research undertaken by
Forrester for Microsoft which ranks 'Likelihood to benefit from the use
of accessible technology by type of difficulty/impairment among
computer users' (http://fastlink.headstar.com/forrester1). In the table
for mild disabilities, people with impaired vision are ranked third
behind manual dexterity and hearing but in the rankings for severe
disability, vision-impaired people come top with 11.1 million people
likely to benefit, with manual dexterity in second (6.8 million).
 
I want to add only one piece of objective but unpublished data to this
sorry tale: when I worked on research into the typographical reading
preferences of vision-impaired teenagers (published in the article
headed 'Size counts' in the British Journal of Visual Impairment,
volume 17, 1999), of the group I observed in a further education
college only one student read anything outside the set curriculum.
 
So we can readily conclude from all this data that gathering
information from the internet poses severe problems for people with
impaired vision, and that these are compounded by difficulties with
handling enlarged print. As for tape and Braille users, they may have
all the facility in the world with their medium but the quantity of
material available to them is pathetically low. I have just finished a
part-time course which required the study of classic texts and modern
interpretations; the former were all available, but the latter non-
existent. The RNIB provided a brilliant service but the Braille and even
tape resources available were paltry.
 
In a society of conflicting needs and limited resources you have to ask
whether the struggle is worth the effort. The answer has to be positive
but, not for the first time, we should be discussing voluntary sector
capacity rather than rights. There is not much point, other than the
symbolic, in international organisations and national governments
legislating ends but ignoring means.
 
The one key conclusion I draw from all this data is that the government
must at last begin to take seriously the task of facilitating information.
As Vice Chair of RNIB I am reluctant to specify that we should be the
agent of government funding for this purpose but there is now an
overwhelming case for the voluntary sector as a whole in the field of
vision impairment to work in partnership to provide appropriate and
timely information.
 
In the age of classic text, blind people could, with enormous effort and
ingenuity, hope to compete with sighted peers in such areas as classics,
literature, law, theology, philosophy and even some branches of
theoretical science. At work they could hope to succeed in jobs where
the frameworks and practices were stable over decades. But now all
that has changed, and there have not been consequently radical changes
in provision of support for them.
 
Of course we will all continue to campaign for more accessible web
sites, more inclusive e-learning and more market sensitive operating
systems and software, but in parallel we need to campaign for in-sector
facilitation. Without it, the gap between people with impaired vision
and the rest of society will widen still further.
 
NOTE: Kevin Carey is Director of HumanITy
(http://www.humanity.org.uk).
 
[Section four ends].
 
 
++END NOTES.
 
+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.
 
To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.
 
Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .
 
Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.
 
+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.
 
ISSN 1476-6337 .
 
[Issue ends.]
