+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 54, JUNE 2004.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk/).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 54 CONTENTS.

01: Europe launches major access programme
- Research project paves way for international guidelines.

02: Banks named and shamed over card problems
- Failures to explain 'Chip and PIN' alternative.

03: Guidelines for local government chiefs
- Managers, policymakers and designers targeted.

04: Council trio claim 'AAA' rating
- Expert praises effort but questions detail.

News in Brief: 05: Inclusion focus - Hong Kong conference; 06:
Additions revealed - publisher database; 07: Arabian rights - UN-
backed forum.

Section two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Validator problem - HTML struggle; 09: Radio objections - article
feedback; 10: Training contacts - CDs sought; 11: Bridge request -
accessible game.

Section three: Focus - discussion lists.
12: Chain reaction: 'Self-help' collaborative email lists where access
technology users swap tips and advice can also help manufacturers
improve their products. Mel Poluck reports.

Section four: Analysis - web accessibility.
13: The hard road to progress: The recent Disability Rights
Commission investigation into web accessibility made depressing
reading, but Julie Hill finds that public and private sector pioneers are
now making good headway.

[Contents ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: Sight Village 2004
- 13-15 July, Birmingham, UK.

Around 3,000 people are expected to visit this year's QAC Sight
Village, the exhibition for everyone with an interest in technology and
services connected to visual impairment. Exhibitors and visitors come
from throughout the UK, America, Canada, Europe, the Middle East
and Africa. Smaller organisations of or for people with visual
impairment are particularly welcomed as exhibitors alongside the 'big
players'.

This year the event has moved to a larger venue: the Clarendon Suites,
a conference centre near to the exhibition's host Queen Alexandra
College. All areas of the venue are accessible for wheelchairs, and
admission is free. See:
http://www.qac.ac.uk/sightvillage/6-1.html .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: EUROPE LAUNCHES MAJOR ACCESS PROGRAMME.

The European Commission has launched a major new programme of
research into accessibility policies across EU member states, paving
the way for a set of accessibility guidelines to improve access to digital
services and technologies for disabled users across the continent.

The eInclusion@eu project (http://www.einclusion-eu.org/) will
examine national and regional policies on access to employment,
public sector technology procurement, and access to online public
services such as e-government, e-health and e-learning. As part of its
work the 30-month project aims to build an EU-wide picture of
accessibility requirements for government web sites, including which
accessibility standards are used, if compliance is voluntary or
mandatory, and whether feedback from users is collected and acted on.

Lutz Kubitschke of German consultancy Empirica
(http://www.empirica.com/), which is co-ordinating the research, told
E-Access Bulletin: "It is important to get a structured view of what is
going on out there. It's no good if guidelines are issued in Brussels, but
they are not practical for member states to implement." It is hoped that
by the end of the year, the Commission will use the research to issue
draft guidelines on public procurement, Kubitschke said.

The findings should also uncover valuable information such as
problems with implementing international web accessibility standards.
"In some cases it may be that the expertise needed to translate
guidelines such as WAI (http://www.w3.org/WAI) into procedures is
missing, or that not enough money, time and resources are made
available for accessible web design," said Kubitschke. The
eInclusion@eu project is being driven by a core of research teams in
eight member states, and is funded through the EU's 17.5 billion euro
Sixth Framework research programme
(http://fp6.cordis.lu/fp6/home.cfm).


+02: BANKS NAMED AND SHAMED OVER CARD PROBLEMS.

UK banks who fared poorly in a 'mystery shopping' exercise to test the
accessibility of new-style credit and debit cards are to be "named and
shamed" by the RNIB.

The cards tested use a new so-called 'Chip and PIN' system designed
to combat fraud by requiring users to key in a security PIN number
whenever a purchase is made. Banks are supposed to offer and explain
an alternative to Chip and PIN called 'Chip and signature', which is
easier for some people with impaired vision since they may find
keypads hard to use. However, the survey found that many were not
doing so.

Results of the mystery shopping experiment will be published towards
the end of August and will include full details of which card issuers
were contacted along with a breakdown of the results.

When a pool of vision-impaired 'mystery shoppers'
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/xpedio/groups/public/documents/publicwebsit
e/public_mysteryshopping.hcsp) initially contacted the call centres of
fifteen banks, building societies and credit card companies to ask for
advice on the accessible alternative, just 22 callers out of the total 67
calls made (33 per cent) were told about the alternative and 15 call
centre employees (22 per cent) mentioned that customers could
continue to sign but either gave incorrect information about the chip
and signature card or knew nothing about it.

The RNIB campaigns team is currently working with banks to improve
services, for example leading staff through practical issues such as how
call centre staff can identify when to issue a chip and signature card.
The RNIB has also suggested banks improve information on their
intranets and external information on their web sites. "Internal
communication is the issue," says Helen Dearman, campaigns officer
at RNIB. Dearman says she has already noticed a reduction in the
amount of calls to the RNIB from people complaining about their
banks over this issue, although she adds that a high staff turnover in
bank call centres is likely to hamper progress when the mystery
shopper exercise is repeated in August


+03: GUIDELINES FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT CHIEFS.

The RNIB has published guidelines for senior managers and policy-
makers in local government on how to make new technologies, from
smart cards to tactile displays, more usable by people with disabilities.

Written by Dr John Gill, chief scientist at the RNIB, the 'Access-
Ability' booklet (http://www.tiresias.org/guidelines/access-ability/)
provides an overview of design considerations to be taken into account
when developing new services. From transport and financial
transactions to telecommunications and computing, the publication
outlines common problems experienced by the elderly and disabled
and offers suggestions for addressing them.

"The booklet is targeted at senior managers who aren't specialists in
technology and don't have in-depth knowledge of disability," says Gill.
The guidelines were produced as part of the RNIB's collaboration with
the National Smartcard Project
(http://www.nationalsmartcardproject.org.uk/), one of 22 national
projects commissioned by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister to
aid local authorities on the road to e-government
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/nat1).

The collaboration identified three target audiences who needed more
information about accessibility: senior managers and policy-makers in
local government; project leaders responsible for implementing local e-
government projects; and hardware and software designers who may or
may not work for local government.

The guidelines were developed in collaboration with Comité Européen
de Normalisation (CEN - http://www.cenorm.be/), the European
technology standards body.


+04: COUNCIL TRIO CLAIM 'AAA' RATING.

Three UK local authorities now claim to have web sites which comply
with the highest standard of accessibility under the World Wide Web
Consortium's Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI -
http://www.w3.org/WAI), known as 'AAA' accessibility. One expert
has questioned whether full 'AAA' compliance has indeed been
achieved by these sites, although their intention to move towards full
accessibility was welcomed.

Haringey (http://www.haringey.gov.uk/) in London, Stockport
Metropolitan Borough Council (http://www.stockport.gov.uk/) and
Tameside Council (http://www.tameside.gov.uk/) in Greater
Manchester have all recently relaunched sites that they say now
provide easy access to all visitors, regardless of ability.

Under a central government directive, all public bodies are required to
meet the lower 'AA' standard of accessibility by the end of 2005.

Stockport relaunched its site at the end of May, improving its
accessibility rating from 'A' to 'AAA' standard. It uses an 'off-the-
shelf' solution from Mediasurface (http://www.mediasurface.com/).

Haringey's site was launched in March, using an accessible templated
design integrated into a content management system. This means that
editors enter content using templates with built-in accessibility checks.
For example, they can't enter an image onto the site without including
a textual description which can be read by a blind or visually impaired
person using screen reader technology. Haringey also consulted a
range of users, including those with visual impairments, throughout the
design and build process.

Tameside unveiled its AAA site in December 2003, following
consultation with the RNIB and other relevant bodies.

Helen Petrie, professor of human computer interaction at City
University (http://www-hcid.soi.city.ac.uk/) and a leading accessibility
researcher, says the efforts among local authorities to reach the AAA
standard are highly commendable. However, she says some aspects of
full 'AAA' compliance are complex, and the three council sites appear
to fall short of full 'AAA' compliance. And she says compliance with
standards alone isn't enough to create good web sites. "For example,
the standards say you should provide clear and consistent navigation.
But to achieve this, you need a good understanding of how a range of
users find their way around web sites. This means you need to conduct
user testing. Only by combining compliance with standards and
guidelines with user testing - among the disabled and non-disabled -
will organisations create truly accessible and usable web sites."


++NEWS IN BRIEF:

+05: INCLUSION FOCUS: The seventh international conference on
human services information technology applications in Hong Kong is
to focus on the need to use technologies to build a more digitally
inclusive society. The conference runs from 24 to 27 August:
http://www.hkcss.org.hk/husita7/ .

+06: ADDITIONS REVEALED: Ulverscroft and BBC Audiobooks
are the latest publishers to add their catalogues to Revealweb, the free
national online database of over 100,000 titles available in accessible
formats. Revealweb is run by the RNIB and the National Library for
the Blind:
http://www.revealweb.org.uk/ .

+07: ARABIAN RIGHTS: 'Iinformation and communication
technology for people with disabilities,' a conference in Beirut,
Lebanon, has become the first event of its kind to focus on the
promotion of technologies to people with a disability in Arab countries.
As a follow-up activity, a speech-enabled web forum for the visually
impaired will now be launched. The event was organised by the United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/escwa1.

[Section one ends].


++Special Notice: Techshare 2004 Call for Papers
- 18-19 November 2004, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK

The RNIB's Techshare 2004 conference is an important event for
professionals who are interested in technology and the role it plays in
learning, work and society for people with sight problems.

We are currently looking for people to give presentations in the
following areas: Practical applications of technology; Innovation in
education; Accessible web authoring; IT training; Broadcasting and
digital information delivery; Mobile technology; Producing alternative
formats; Technology in the workplace; Access to operating systems.

If you are interested in presenting, please email techshare@rnib.org.uk
for more information on the format of submissions. The closing date
for submissions is 2 August.

Speakers will be entitled to a reduced rate when registering for the
conference of 130 pounds (or 95 pounds for one day). Speakers and
delegates will also have the opportunity to have an informal exhibit at
a 'Delegate's showcase' table in the conference coffee area at a cost of
40 pounds per table per day.

For further information including standard attendance prices, email
techshare@rnib.org.uk or visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.

Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+08: VALIDATOR PROBLEM: Karina Gregory writes: "I just wanted
to let you know that I used the World Wide Web Consortium's HTML
Validator (http://validator.w3.org/) to validate a webpage that I have
written for my university assignment. I found it incredibly difficult to
use as it seemed to be such a visual thing and I didn't find it very easy
to access, and I was wondering if you knew of anybody who I could
contact to discuss making it more accessible to visually impaired
users?" [Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: RADIO OBJECTIONS: Matt King, Accessibility End User
Advocate with IBM Business Transformation, writes in with strong
personal objections to some of the remarks made by Kevin Carey in his
article 'Radio presenters have more fun' (see E-Access Bulletin, May
2004) which suggested that the job opportunities opened up by internet
radio stations could be more attractive and accessible to blind people
than traditional computer programming work.

"I strongly believe the conclusions Kevin Carey drew from the recent
Disability Rights Commission research on web accessibility and
conveyed in his article are invalid, irresponsible, and damaging," King
says.

"Because blind participants in the study had more trouble completing
tasks or working efficiently even on well-designed web sites, Kevin
claimed that it is reasonable to conclude, 'although blind people will
need IT skills for education, employment and leisure - as means to an
end - they will rarely be good enough in overcoming systems design
problems to secure employment in IT per se. The days when the words
'blind' and 'computer programmer' went together like Morecambe and
Wise were brief and are long gone.'"

King continues: "The DRC study was focused on the web sites, not the
abilities or aptitudes of the participants. It is not logical or valid to
conclude that if the average blind person has trouble using the average
or even better than average web site, that blind people are
proportionately less likely to be able to develop skills that will result in
success in an IT-related field. Even if the vast majority of IT jobs
consisted of using web applications more than 50 per cent of the time
on the job, such a conclusion would still be completely baseless.

"IT-related fields continue to be an excellent choice for any blind
person with the appropriate aptitudes. And, as the accessibility of
advanced development tools improves, the doors open still wider.
True, not all blind people have the nature to be equally good at
presenting radio programs and developing, supporting, or managing
computer-related technologies. Thus, each to his own. However, it is a
mistake to diminish the fitness for consideration of one over the other
purely based on visual acuity. I think it would be tragic if Kevin's
article dampened the spirits of any blind individual who aspires to
become an IT professional. And, on average, I would be shocked if
working in radio pays as well. There is no doubt that radio is a smaller
and less diverse field." [Further comments please to
inbox@headstar.com].


+10: TRAINING CONTACTS: Javad Momayez of Indiana University
in Indianapolis, US writes: "I am very interested to purchase some
tutorial or training CDs for access software packages such as Co:writer
4000, ZoomText, Texthelp, JAWS, WindowEyes, Open books and
Magic. Do you know the name and web site of any company so I can
contact them?"
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+11: BRIDGE REQUEST: We did not receive a response last month to
Brenda Nichol's query about whether anyone knew of an accessible
computer game for the card game bridge, so we would like to repeat
the request - surely one of our readers must be a bridge player?
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section two ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: WEB ACCESSIBILITY FORUM.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/ .

[Special notice ends].


SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- DISCUSSION LISTS.

+12: CHAIN REACTION
by Mel Poluck.

Email discussions groups have long served as a convenient, accessible
tool for like-minded people to exchange ideas and advice on almost
any topic, including the use of special access technologies.

One such resource is the low vision computer access discussion list, or
Magnifiers group, a dynamic group started by Peter Verhoeven. The
list is an offshoot of a web site entitled 'The Screen Magnifiers
homepage' (http://www.magnifiers.org/), from the non-profit
independent organisation of the same name.

As with most such lists, subscribers send an email to a single address,
and the posting can be viewed by all other members. It provides a
convenient forum for professionals, manufacturers, distributors, vision-
impaired users and potential buyers of assistive technologies to support
and advise one another in the use of access products.

List members offer tips on and reviews of existing and new assistive
technologies; tip-offs on good deals; problems found; and request
tricks on how to overcome difficulties or simply share experiences.

Many subscribers also post basic product reviews and
recommendations as well as more in-depth analysis of product
features. For example, a member may ask the list whether they think
there are too many menus in the main window of the screen magnifier
ZoomText (http://www.aisquared.com/), or which hand-held portable
magnifier they think is most efficient.

For Tom Whittle, product range manager of technology products at the
RNIB, lists such as these - and there is at least one for every major
product on the market - provide a means of flagging up important user
issues that may remain undiscovered from the confines of his office. "I
like flicking through them and seeing the problems people have," he
says.

The potential of this simple way of communicating is wide: not only
do such lists provide a place to share information and smooth out
niggling mundane user problems; potentially, archived postings can act
as a huge resource of market research for access technology companies
who could use it to vastly improve their access products. "Email lists
are a good way of getting customer feedback to the manufacturer - if
manufacturers have any sense, they'll monitor," Whittle says.

Discussion lists can also be a way for manufacturers and others to put
the record straight on rumours or malicious attacks, he says. "I
contribute when I see something not true."

Some assistive technology companies actively develop and support
their own user discussion lists. For example GW Micro, the company
behind screen reader Window-Eyes, offers multi-lingual discussion
lists, information discussion lists and newslists
(http://www.gwmicro.com/support).

Ultimately, such 'self-help' support options may even bring down
product costs, Whittle says. "When you look at software access
products, the main cost is support," he says. When buying or
developing software for example, the initial costs may be outweighed
by the ongoing costs of support, he says.

"The more complicated the product, the more support is needed,"
Whittle says. "It's a good idea to have as many [means of supporting
customers] as possible. I've used them myself when I am a novice at
certain products," says Whittle, who regularly tests new assistive
technologies in his job.

In some cases, manufacturers are using discussion lists directly to
improve their products. One such company is Plextor
(http://www.plextalk.com/europe), a leading US developer and
manufacturer of CD-related equipment and software which researches
and engineers products for digital talking book players.

Their recording e-book player, the Plextalk portable recorder 'PTR1'
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/plex1) has its own email list,
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/plex2) started out of a high demand from
users for discussing features of this potentially complicated product.
"These guys are good at taking tips from people - they've got a good
development team," Whittle says.

However, Whittle does offer a caution: "People in groups have
different agendas," he says. Some people may use the forum to market
their own products for example. As with all information retrieved from
the internet, it is important to check the facts, he says.

"I look at the Magnifiers list to see how people are coping with the
technology that's there," says Colin Holloway, owner of assistive
technology company New Vision, and a regular contributor. "It upsets
a lot of manufacturers but I like that honesty."

[Section three ends].


++SECTION FOUR: ANALYSIS
- WEB ACCESSIBILITY.

+13: THE HARD ROAD TO PROGRESS
by Julie Hill

In April this year, the Disability Rights Commission (http://www.drc/-gb.org)
published the findings of the largest ever research project into
web accessibility (see E-Government Bulletin, issue 159, 16 April
2004). Its conclusions make pretty depressing reading: only 19 per cent
of a sample of 1,000 UK sites meet even the minimum standard for
disabled web access under the World Wide Web Consortium's Web
Accessibility Initiative (WAI - http://www.w3.org/WAI) guidelines.
There is also a distinct lack of awareness among web site owners and
designers about accessibility.

However, despite the disappointing picture of web accessibility painted
in the report, there are organisations making significant efforts to
ensure their online services are accessible to all.

Laura van Weyenbergh is e-communications officer at Rushcliffe
Borough Council (http://www.rushcliffe.gov.uk/), which launched its
accessibility initiative in 2001. At that time, awareness of web
accessibility issues was fairly low, she says. "Our original site was
designed in the late nineties, when web accessibility issues simply
weren't being discussed outside specialist organisations," says van
Weyenbergh. "While it was expected that public buildings must have
wheelchair access and induction loops for people with hearing aids, it
was neither known nor understood how people with vision and motor
impairments might use a web site."

A combination of legislative pressures and feedback from citizens who
couldn't access the council's site compelled Rushcliffe into action. It
formed a dedicated communications team to deal with web
accessibility in 2001 and is now working towards AA compliance with
the WAI guidelines, which it hopes to achieve by the end of this year.
Indeed, like other public bodies, the council had to commit to AA
compliance by 2005 as part of its Implementing E-Government (IEG)
statement to the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister this year.

At Rushcliffe, the formation of the communications department was a
catalyst for change, although the council recognises that accessibility is
an ongoing challenge that requires new mindsets and new ways of
working. "It is crucial to do the groundwork to ensure that web site
contributors understand their role in accessibility," she says. "We have
tried to encourage staff to view accessibility as the norm rather than
extra work, but admittedly this has been difficult." There are always
instances of where content needs to be added immediately and this is
difficult to plan for, she says. "In these instances, we try to add a more
accessible version of information as soon as is practicable," van
Weyenbergh says.

One of the other challenges for Rushcliffe was its relationship with
suppliers. When it first launched its initiative, few suppliers knew
about web accessibility. "But we didn't come across any that weren't
willing to have a go," van Weyenbergh says. "The knowledge of
suppliers has improved considerably since then, although we do still
come across one or two who aren't familiar with accessibility."

The imperative towards web accessibility for commercial organisations
is perhaps less clear-cut. Centrica (http://www.centrica.co.uk/), a
conglomerate whose brands include the AA (http://www.theaa.com/),
British Gas (http://www.house.co.uk/) and One.Tel
(http://www.onetel.co.uk/), is among a minority of corporates who have
taken this issue seriously. Since 1999, it has been working towards
making sure all its sites are accessible to all its customers. The impetus
came from a commitment by senior management to embrace the
Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which requires all organisations to
ensure that their services, including web sites, are equally accessible to
disabled people. However, there was a broader perspective to the
company's thinking. "The commercial logic was clear," says James
Donnan, corporate brand manager at Centrica. "Investing time and
money to create effective and usable web sites would deliver a payback
by generating customer loyalty and more return visits - and would
ultimately lead to more business."

Both van Weyenbergh and Donnan agree that it is crucial to set up
formal structures and to get people's buy-in to make accessibility
initiatives successful. Centrica pooled expertise from across the
organisation by setting up a web accessibility group, consisting of
representatives from its main web sites. The group sought to interpret
the WAI guidelines in practical terms that could be understood by web
development teams and sought advice from external experts, such as
the charity AbilityNet (http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/). "It is important
to get all the right people together at the outset and to gain a clear
understanding of what the accessibility guidelines mean in real terms
for your site," Donnan says. "You then need to raise awareness about
accessibility across the business, so that you get everyone's buy-in to
what you are doing."

Neither Rushcliffe nor Centrica feel that they have had to compromise
creativity in creating accessible web sites. "Some people think that
accessible sites are dull and worthy, but we don't think so," says
Donnan. "With centrica.com, we have used prominent imagery and
created an attractive environment for the user which is still accessible.
Once our programmers and designers understood the parameters they
had to work in, they saw it as a challenge to see how creative they
could be."

Nor have accessible web sites necessarily created extra cost for
Centrica - another common misconception among commercial
organisations, in particular. All new developments are built with
accessibility in mind from the start and the company has found that the
cost of programming and development is much the same. And for
existing sites, the company has made improvements as part of phased
site updates. "If you plan your site development so that accessibility
improvements can be incorporated along with other work, then it may
not necessarily create greater expense," says Donnan. "It has really
helped to take a long-term view, as accessibility has now become
second nature to our web teams."

Taking web accessibility on board has resulted in a better online
experience all round, says van Weyenbergh. "Once you start to look at
creating an accessible web page, you are forced to confront issues,
such as usability, the importance of well-written content and
consistency," she says. "This benefits everyone who visits your site."

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com/ .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

