+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 53, MAY 2004.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 53 CONTENTS.

01: RNIB moots 'social firm' for web testing
- independent company could create jobs.

02: Culture department site accessible by phone
- no computer needed to navigate information and links.

03: E-learning students search in vain
- educational time is largely wasted.

04: Spindrift in the moan zone
- commentator says volunteers are second-class citizens.

News in brief: 05: Easy publishing - new DAISY package; 06: Live
music - library resources; 07: Broad overview - access guidelines.

Section two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Access assistance - JAWS support request from Brazil; 09: Bridge
game - card player; 10: Civil service - happy ending; 11: Usability
question - research response; 12: Tiresias font - further info.

Section three: Opinion - multimedia.
13: Radio presenters have more fun: It is harder for blind people to
become computer programmers these days, but the comparative ease of
broadcasting radio programmes over the internet has opened up new
and more enjoyable career paths, says Kevin Carey.

Section four: Seminar report - accessible e-government.
14: Culture of accessibility: the key to creating services which are
accessible to people with disabilities is changing the way people think,
says Julie Hill.

[Contents ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: RNIB MOOTS 'SOCIAL FIRM' FOR WEB TESTING.

The RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk) is investigating the feasibility of
creating an independent "social firm", staffed by blind and visually
impaired people, to provide web site developers with much-needed
resources for web accessibility testing.

The announcement is one of the ideas mooted by the RNIB in response
to the recent Disability Rights Commission (http://www.drc-gb.org)
investigation into web accessibility (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 52,
April 2004), which revealed that some 81 per cent of UK web sites fail
to meet even the most basic accessibility requirements for disabled
people.

"One of the most important messages that came out of the DRC
findings was that companies can't just follow the Web Accessibility
Initiative (http://www.w3c.org/WAI) guidelines; they have to test
accessibility among disabled users," says Richard Orme, assistant
director for information and communications technology at the RNIB.
"The creation of a social firm would be one way of linking visually
impaired people with web designers - and providing employment
opportunities at the same time."

The idea of an independent "social firm" - supported by funding or
even set up as a for-profit organisation - fits with the RNIB's aim to
promote employment opportunities for blind and vision-impaired
people. Full-time staff would be needed to run and sell the accessibility
services, while a bank of people could be employed on a flexible basis
to supply testing services.

"The RNIB has been contacted by blind and deaf-blind people who are
ready to get stuck in and companies looking for real users," says Orme.
"We just need to link the two together."

The RNIB already hosts a social firm at its Redhill College of Further
Education. Called Insight, the company specialises in transcribing
information and resources into audio, large print and Braille formats.

The institute also plans to run regional seminars for businesses that
want to learn more about web accessibility policy. The seminars will
include practical demonstrations of the technology blind and partially
sighted people use to read web sites.


+02: CULTURE DEPARTMENT SITE ACCESSIBLE BY PHONE.

Vision-impaired users can now access the entire web site of the
Department of Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS -
http://www.culture.gov.uk) using a touch-tone phone, following the
launch of a three-month trial of new technology that is the first of its
kind by a UK government agency.

Users access the service at local call rates by calling 0845 333 0850
and following spoken instructions. Navigation is achieved using the 12
keys of a standard phone layout, with right-hand keys providing a
range of forward options and those on the left moving the user
backwards.

The experience aims to be similar to using a text-to-speech computer
screenreader, for example providing voice output from text tags to
describe the purpose of links and the content of graphics. And
according to technology developer PhoneAnything
(http://www.phoneanything.com), content that is often problematic to
screenreader users such as tables of data and Adobe pdf documents
should also be accessible to users of the service.

In general however, the user experience for this kind of service will
depend heavily on how well-designed the web site is, said
PhoneAnything managing director Stefan Haselwimmer. "The
technology is designed to identify where the main text of a web page
is, in contrast to links and menus, for example," he said. "There could
be problems if the page layout is not clear."

According to the RNIB, providing web access to people who don't use
computers is valuable to people with impaired vision, who tend to be
more familiar with phone and TV technology than with computers.
However, this also means that much of the jargon used in web sites
will be unfamiliar to many. "Instructions like 'click this' won't mean
much to someone who doesn't already know about computers and the
web," said Digital Policy Development Officer Julie Howell. "We need
to start questioning the assumption that accessible sites would be
accessible to anyone on another device."


+03: E-LEARNING STUDENTS SEARCH IN VAIN.

Students with impaired vision using web-based educational materials
spend only around 30 per cent of their time actually using the
materials; the rest of their time is spent searching and navigating for
pages and options, according to RNIB research.

Zoe Neumann, technology development officer at the institute's
Technology in Learning and Employment programme (TiLE -
http://www.rnib.org.uk/technology), revealed the statistic at last
weeks' seminar 'E-Learning: the future of training in the public sector'
(http://www.electronic-government.com/elearning.htm) organised by
our sister publication E-Government Bulletin.

The TiLE team recently arranged focus groups to investigate students'
experience of using technology in an educational setting, with
outcomes that "brought you down to earth with a bump," Neumann
said.

Neumann advised delegates to contact the TiLE team for help in
measuring for web accessibility in an educational context, and also
recommended the use of the DAISY digital book format
(http://www.daisy.org) as an e-learning tool.


+04: SPINDRIFT IN THE MOAN ZONE.

Hard-working volunteers who produce news tapes and audio
magazines for the blind are not being given the respect they deserve,
according to edition 10 of 'Site for Sore Eyes'
(http://www.kenmatthews.pwp.blueyonder.co.uk), an audio magazine
for the blind and visually impaired.

"I have attended various meetings about the impact of audio
technology on the visually impaired," says Ken Matthews, the site's
founder and vice-chairman of the Mid-Fife Newstape, a talking
newspaper and audio magazine service for the visually impaired in
Glenrothes and Kircaldy. "Generally there are other production
volunteers from other news tapes, people who have devoted decades to
their visually impaired friends, and who have intimate knowledge of
their high-tech equipment, digital, as well as cassette tape. However,
because we are volunteers and unpaid, we seem to rank lower than
other people who are paid a handsome wage for their efforts."

Matthews says that the chairpeople presiding over such meetings tend
to pay homage to the paid professionals in the industry, while talking
down to volunteers, despite their considerable expertise.

'Site for Sore Eyes' was founded in 1997 and is written by Matthews
under the editorial pseudonym of 'Spindrift'. His aim is to "unspin the
spin", giving his take on events that hit the headlines.


++NEWS IN BRIEF:

+05: EASY PUBLISHING: A new software package that allows users
to create DAISY digital 'talking books' from simple text files,
'EasePublisher', has been launched by Dolphin Audio Publishing:
http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/audio/news/ep_launch.htm .

+06: LIVE MUSIC: A website dedicated to music library services for
people with disabilities has been launched by the UK and Ireland
branch of the International Association of Music Librarians. It includes
information on music technology and courses. Follow the link marked
'resources' at:
http://pages.britishlibrary.net/iaml.uk.irl/accessibility/ .

+07: BROAD OVERVIEW: An overview of existing guidelines and
experimental data on accessible technology was published last week by
RNIB chief scientist Dr John Gill. 'Access-ability: making technology
more usable by people with disabilities' covers the gamut of
technologies from ticket machines to smart homes and is aimed at
managers, policy-makers and designers:
http://www.tiresias.org/guidelines/access-ability/ .

[Section one ends].


++Special Notice: Techshare 2004 Call for Papers
- 18-19 November 2004, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK

The RNIB's Techshare 2004 conference is an important event for
professionals who are interested in technology and the role it plays in
learning, work and society for people with sight problems.

We are currently looking for people to give presentations in the
following areas:
Practical applications of technology; Innovation in education;
Accessible web authoring; IT training; Broadcasting and digital
information delivery; Mobile technology; Producing alternative
formats; Technology in the workplace; Access to operating systems.

If you are interested in presenting, please email techshare@rnib.org.uk
for more information on the format of submissions. The closing date
for submissions is 2 August.

Speakers will be entitled to a reduced rate when registering for the
conference of 130 pounds (or 95 pounds for one day). Speakers and
delegates will also have the opportunity to have an informal exhibit at
a 'Delegate's showcase' table in the conference coffee area at a cost of
40 pounds per table per day.

For further information including standard attendance prices, email
techshare@rnib.org.uk or visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.

Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .


+08: ACCESS ASSISTANCE: Ana Cristina Souto of the Brazilian
social inclusion body Rede SACI (http://www.saci.org.br) writes in on
behalf of a nurse, Lana, whose 13-year-old son Rafail is blind, and
relies on Braille for his reading.

"I promised him to buy him a computer for his birthday and I did,"
says Lana. "Now the problem: he is not able to use it without special
program called Jaws. I checked on the price for it and was almost
shocked. It's 1,030 dollars. I cannot afford it with all my and Rafail's
medical bills, mortgage payments and divorce! So the new computer
now just stands at the table like a piece of furniture and poor Rafail
going around it all upset.

"I was wondering if you know any organisation that can assist people
on buying technology products for blind children. Rafail wants to go
on internet and news sites to help him with projects and homework, but
cannot see the screen." [Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: BRIDGE GAME: Brenda Nichol writes in to say: "I have a friend
who has recently lost her sight owing to a brain tumour. She is a highly
intelligent lady in her seventies and loves doing crosswords. Is there an
accessible bridge game she could use? Currently she has never played
bridge but I am sure could pick it up. Is there a computer game?"
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: CIVIL SERVICE: Last month Harish Kotian from India wrote in
to ask if any of our readers had information about blind people
working in the UK civil service, which might help a friend with
impaired vision who had been denied a civil service job in India.

Paul McKee of HM Customs and Excise responded: "There are many
blind and partially sighted workers in the UK civil service, including
myself. Indeed the recruiting policy of the UK civil service encourages
diversity and rejects discrimination on the grounds of gender, disability
ethnic origin and so on. People are appointed to jobs based on their
ability to do the job, if necessary with reasonable adjustments made to
what work is done and how it's done.

"If for example assistive technology would enable a blind or partially
sighted person to do a job, the equipment is provided by the
government. This is regardless of whether it's for a clerk or a senior
administrator.

"Having said all of the above and believing that the civil service is
probably the best and most forward thinking employer of disabled
people, there is a word of caution. We in the UK enjoy the protection
of the Disability Discrimination Act which protects our right to
employment."

Steve Bingham, who works at the Inland Revenue, adds: "I have not
been able to find any figures that show how many vision impaired
people work in the British Civil Service. It is likely to be in the
hundreds. The vast majority are in the lower grades as typists or
telephonists. A few, mainly professional people like solicitors do make
the higher grades.

"At present many departments are having great difficulty integrating
their typists and telephonists into the mainstream of Civil Service jobs.
The typing and telephony jobs are being overtaken by technology and
there are not many jobs that can be completed entirely by a vision-
impaired person. Even the route I took to get from being a typist to
being a relatively senior civil servant seems to have been overtaken by
technology and is no longer open to youngsters - I was a computer
programmer and am now an adviser on disability issues and
technology."

Our reader and regular correspondent Chris McMillan says: "As far
back as the late 1960s when I left school, the Civil Service was a very
acceptable way for the registered partially sighted to be employed. One
or two of my friends went straight into it from school: one has just
taken redundancy from the British Library. He was a clerk. Another
friend went into the Tax Office as an audio typist, also in the early
1970s.

"Many blind and partially sighted people were able to get jobs then as
typists or telephonists in big organisations in general. Today, with the
use of the personal (human) reader and our accessible technology
equipment, I see no reason why a visually impaired person shouldn't do
these jobs."

The story has a happy ending for Harish's friend in India as well: he
has written in again himself to thank everyone for their encouraging
responses and to say: "Good news from this side, as well. The supreme
court has made a favourable judgement and subsequently the blind
person has now joined the civil service."


+11: USABILITY QUESTION: Steve Bingham of the Inland Revenue
(see previous item) also has a response to last issue's report on the
newly-published Disability Rights Commission (DRC) research into
web accessibility which has been a major talking point in the
accessibility community.

"I read with interest the reports on the DRC's research. I found myself
wondering if there was a difference in what WAI [the international
Web Accessibility Initiative] and the DRC were talking about. The
WAI standards are about accessibility while it sounded to me as if the
DRC research was more about usability.

"There is a difference. For example I recently reviewed a set of screens
for use by people working in a government call centre. The screens
were reasonably accessible. All the links had alternative texts and all
the fields had title texts but the screens were still largely unusable by a
sight-impaired person using a screen reader because most of them had
over 100 fields on them. It would be too long a process to find
appropriate fields and complete them while trying to deal with a
member of the public on a telephone.

"This is an extreme example, but I have come across many sites that
are reasonably accessible but they become unusable because of the
order in which information is given or requested or because there are
just too many links for the relevant data to be found easily."


+12: TIRESIAS FONT: Sylvie Perera of the RNIB Scientific Research
Unit has a little more information on Tiresias LPfont which has been
the subject of recent discussion about accessible typefaces. "Tiresias
LPfont is part of the family of typefaces that have been designed for
legibility. LPfont is specifically designed for text in a large print
publication for people with low vision. For other applications such as
computer displays, PCfont is more appropriate. The research that went
into developing these typefaces is also available. For more information
or to order the typefaces, see:
http://www.tiresias.org/fonts .

[Section two ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: WEB ACCESSIBILITY FORUM.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


SECTION THREE: OPINION
- MULTIMEDIA.

+13: RADIO PRESENTERS HAVE MORE FUN
by Kevin Carey .

The more I think about it, the more I cannot help concluding that the
most important finding of the recently-published Disability Rights
Commission research on web accessibility
(http://www.drc-gb.org/publicationsandreports/report.asp), as it affects
blind people, is
the finding that they only completed 55 per cent of set tasks as opposed
to the disability average of 76 per cent. Even on well-designed,
accessible sites, blind users were three times as slow as sighted peers.

There is bound to be some argument about the extent to which this
poor performance can be improved by better applications and better
user interface design but as pigs will fly before the technology will be
sufficiently improved, such arguments are academic niceties.

What this means is that although blind people will need IT skills for
education, employment and leisure - as means to an end - they will
rarely be good enough in overcoming systems design problems to
secure employment in IT per se. The days when the words 'blind' and
'computer programmer' went together like Morecambe and Wise were
brief and are long gone. Furthermore, two areas where blind people of
modest talent have performed reasonably well are fast disappearing:
the presence of a graceful and efficient personal assistant is giving way
to the horrible sight of company chief executives typing their own
memos with two fingers; and machine processing is replacing a host of
jobs, largely text-based, which used to require simple IT skills.

Conversely, however, the explosion in all forms of broadcasting and
multimedia publishing opens up vast new areas of opportunity for
production and presentation by people with impaired vision. VIP ON
AIR (http://www.viponair.com), the community radio station operated
from Glasgow by blind trainees, has grown into a self confident,
professional outfit in a matter of months and I have no doubt that some
of them will be welcomed by mainstream broadcasters in due course.
Community radio might also allow us to experiment with employment
models such as the social firm.

If we are going to take advantage of this new set of opportunities we
need to rid ourselves of two stereotypes. The first is that all half-bright
blind people are computer wizards; they are not. Just because you have
a rucksack full of the latest gadgets doesn't mean you are much good
compared with your sighted peers. The second is that broadcasting can
only be successfully carried out by major organisations like the BBC
and that you need a university degree in Classics to gain employment
at such places. Radio can and should be cheap and cheerful and not
over-cooked.

In starting off by broadcasting over the internet VIP ON AIR is giving
itself the chance to iron out presentation wrinkles and find its own
voice before graduating to other broadcasting media. It should also
soon be flattered by the creation of countless imitations and variants.
As I have worked in both fields I can personally attest that radio is
much more fun than computing which, in our sector, might just be a bit
of a drawback!

[Section three ends].


++SECTION FOUR: SEMINAR REPORT
- ACCESSIBLE E-GOVERNMENT.

+14: CULTURE OF ACCESSIBILITY
by Julie Hill.

Cultural change is one of the biggest challenges facing public sector
bodies as they strive to make their e-government services accessible to
people with disabilities, according to many of the speakers and
delegates at E-Government Bulletin's March seminar 'E-Government
for all: planning for accessibility'
(http://www.electronic-government.com/access.htm).

Despite legal and moral requirements for public service providers to
make web sites accessible to all regardless of ability, many
organisations are still struggling to instil the importance of accessible
services among management and staff, according to one local authority
delegate.

"My authority has produced clear content and communications
standards for accessibility, but it can be difficult to get staff buy-in,"
the delegate told an interactive question-and-answer session. "With the
day-to-day pressures of work and the practical issues around getting
web content up quickly, things sometimes fall apart."

It is crucial for public bodies to obtain buy-in for accessibility from the
highest level of the organisation, she said. But this can be difficult
when managers think that technical staff can "wave a magic wand" to
make services accessible, as a second delegate put it, without a real
understanding of what accessibility involves and the need for training
across the organisation. Training is becoming even more important as
public bodies increasingly move towards multiple content contributors
for their web sites, he said.

Laura van Weyenbergh, e-communications officer at Rushcliffe
Borough Council (http://www.rushcliffe.gov.uk), agreed that
communication with staff was the key. "It is crucial to do the
groundwork to ensure that web site contributors understand their role
in accessibility," she said. "We have tried to encourage staff to view
accessibility as the norm rather than extra work, but admittedly this has
been difficult."

Access to the right skills and knowledge about accessibility is another
problem for government bodies. Often they don't have the requisite
skills in-house, but equally they can't always rely on the expertise of
their IT suppliers or the web developer community, delegates heard.

One problem is that a confusing array of so-called accessibility
'standards' can be difficult for non-specialist organisations to evaluate,
said Tom Adams, senior digital media consultant at the Office of the e-
Envoy (OeE - http://www.e-envoy.gov.uk). "Although the World Wide
Web Consortium's Web Accessibility Initiative guidelines
[http://www.w3.org/WAI] have become the de facto international
standard for accessibility, they were only ever intended as guidelines
and as such are open to interpretation," he said. While the OeE has
produced its own guidelines on accessibility
(http://www.e-envoy.gov.uk/webguidelines.htm), based on standards
such as e-GIF and the WAI guidelines, he admitted that "we, like
everyone else, are slow in adopting and adhering to the guidelines."

Automated software tools that check web accessibility, such as the
well-known Watchfire Bobby (http://bobby.watchfire.com), can
provide some guidance for government bodies, but are of limited
value, according to one delegate. In particular, it is only by testing sites
with users that government bodies can guarantee that their services are
not only technically accessible - capable of being used with assistive
technologies, such as screen readers - but usable.

However, delegates highlighted the difficulties of engaging with user
communities to get help in testing. "Although we advertised to get
input from web users, it was difficult to get their response," said van
Weyenbergh. "In the end, we didn't get much input from the local
community."

Even if they do manage to get feedback from the public, how can
government bodies and their suppliers measure the outcomes of user
testing, asked Ian Franklin, human factors consultant for technology
supplier EDS. Are there metrics available to help with this?

This question sparked a debate among experts about the nature of
usability. Guido Gybels, director of new technologies at the Royal
National Institute for Deaf People (http://www.rnid.org.uk), and the
OeE's Adams agreed that usability was a largely subjective issue,
dependent on the user's skills, experience and background. However,
Helen Petrie, professor of human computer interaction design at City
University (http://www.city.ac.uk), said that her research has shown
that there will always be a common core of key outcomes across all
tests by all user groups, however diverse.

The question for service providers, said Petrie, is at which point they
are happy that their accessibility efforts are sufficient. Is it once 90 or
95 per cent of people can access their site, for example? Adams agreed
that 100 per cent accessibility is an unachievable goal, because there
will always be someone who cannot access your site because they are
using a very unusual web browser, for example. The important thing
for local authorities, he said, is to be able to show that they have taken
all reasonable steps possible to make their site as accessible as
possible.

This work will pay off for all users, said Petrie. "If your organisation
conducts testing with people with print disabilities, it will pick up
problems that are common to all users. The result will be an exemplary
site for everyone," she said.

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

