+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 59, NOVEMBER 2004.
 
Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).
 
NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .
 
 
++Issue 59 Contents.
 
Section One: News.
 
01: Free talking book service launched
- DAISY transcription for teachers and students.
 
02: Mixed welcome for first accessible DVD
- 'Censorship' criticism of general release film.
 
03: Directory targets every UK business
- expanding reference work lists accessibility features.
 
04: 'Talking PDA' software to be unveiled at Techshare
- solution works with off-the-shelf products.
 
News in brief: 05: Judicial correction - US law; 06: Accessible result -
search engine; 07: Class mate - Macintosh tool for students.
 
Section Two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: US law - corrections to last issue; 09: Sign here - signature debate
continues; 10: PHP course - training feedback; 11: Online therapy -
massage e-group.
 
Section Three: Focus - Web accessibility.
+12: The Controversial Voice of the Web: Part II. With debate raging
about the value of speech-enabling web sites as one possible route to
accessibility, Julie Hill charts the response from software companies
and accessibility experts.
 
Section Four: Focus - Handheld computers.
+13: A guided tour of PAC Mate: John Williams runs through the
features and capabilities of this accessible personal digital assistant.
 
[Contents ends].
 
 
++Section One: News.
 
+01: Free Talking Book Service Launched.
 
A free DAISY digital talking book transcription service for teachers
and students has been launched by Virtual SEN
(http://www.virtualsen.com), a digital publishing collective that
develops accessible new media resources for special needs education.
 
DAISY (Digital Accessible Information System -
http://www.daisy.org) is the key international standard for talking
books which can be accessed by blind people and others with problems
reading print.
 
The DAISY and education area of the Virtual SEN site
(http://www.virtualsen.com/daisy/daisy.htm) allows teachers and
students to submit content - worksheets, essays, booklets - along with
relevant pictures, for manual transformation by specialists into
downloadable DAISY books, with synchronised, searchable text and
audio.
 
An archive will then be made available for free to users, providing a
pool of accessible education content.
 
"We wanted to offer a free service to pupils and teachers interested in
creating and accessing DAISY content," says Will Pearson, founder of
Virtual SEN. "This forum enables teachers and pupils to share material
and encourages them to experiment with the DAISY format."
 
Pearson recently left the RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk), where he was
responsible for the DfES-funded "DAISY Literacy Materials for the
Inclusive Classroom" project to explore how DAISY content could be
exploited in schools. The initial focus of transcription work is likely to
be on early years fiction, he said.
 
In order to access the free archive, users will need DAISY playback
software, such as EaseReader from Dolphin
(http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/audio/) or the DAISY Consortium's free
TPB Reader (http://www.daisy.org/tpbreader/index.asp?lang=en).
 
 
+02: Mixed Welcome for First Accessible DVD.
 
The RNIB has issued a qualified welcome to a new DVD version of
the Shawshank Redemption, the first general release film DVD to be
issued with audio description and talking menus for vision-impaired
people.
 
Audio description offers a descriptive narrative of actions, gestures,
scene changes and other visual information which would not otherwise
be available to vision-impaired people.
 
The new DVD has been produced by Granada Ventures
(http://www.granadamedia.com) on the tenth anniversary of the film's
initial release
 
The RNIB has broadly welcomed the new three-disc boxed set DVD,
although it criticised the fact that only one of the three discs has audio-
described content with talking menus. This means that while vision-
impaired people can access the main feature and choose specific
scenes, they can't, for example, access interviews with actors on the
other discs.
 
Additionally, when the discs are put into a DVD player, there is no
way of identifying which disc is which.
 
"The talking menu feature should be available on all three discs. If you
couldn't see at all and put disc two or three into your DVD player,
you'd have no idea what was on that disc, let alone how to get to the
area you were interested in," says Jill Whitehead, broadcasting and
talking images officer at the RNIB. She also criticised the fact that the
disc that contains audio content only speaks three out of six of its menu
options, meaning vision-impaired people are excluded from some
content such as the directors' cut.
 
"The problem with this product is that the publisher has decided for
blind and visually impaired people what they might want to access,"
says Whitehead. "This is in effect a form of censorship." If Granada
Ventures had consulted with the RNIB it would have been able to
avoid such basic design faults, Whitehead says.
 
However, she welcomed the broad efforts towards accessibility being
made. "Granada have made a giant step forward in making DVDs
accessible and showing to the rest of the industry what's possible, they
just haven't gone quite far enough. Hopefully this will be the first of
many more and, for a first attempt, this is a very commendable effort."
 
 
+03: Directory Targets Every UK Business.
 
A free online directory has been launched with the aim of providing
information on the accessibility of facilities and services provided by
every UK business.
 
'Direct Enquiries' (http://www.directenquiries.com) provides details
about the current accessibility of facilities such as lifts; toilets; 
counter
heights; lighting; alternative formats such as large print and Braille;
and staff assistance; and also what new accessibility features are
planned to be provided in the future.
 
Users must register with the service, and can then search for
information by business type, name or location. They may also request
email alerts to notify them when frequently-used businesses update
information. Users may also send feedback on what they think about
services and facilities.
 
"The goal over the next year is to get every business service provider
in the UK on board," said Liz Hollander, a spokesperson for the
service. The latest signatories are London Transport and the
Metropolitan Police, and discussions with the prison service are
ongoing.
 
The directory was set up as a private company by its chief executive
Grant Kennedy, whose father is wheelchair-bound, in association with
the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation (RADAR -
http://www.radar.org.uk) and the Employers' Forum on Disability
(http://www.employers-forum.co.uk/www/index.htm). Businesses pay
35 pounds to register with Direct Enquiries, of which around 10
pounds goes to its two charity partners.
 
 
+04: PDA Debate Warms Up For Techshare.
 
An application that allows personal digital assistants (PDAs) to "talk"
to users is to be launched in the Spring and will be showcased at the
RNIB assistive technology exposition Techshare this week
(http://www.techshare.org.uk).
 
The software speaks aloud to PDA users who navigate using a tactile
interface. "What we hope to do is give customers the option of taking
an off-the-shelf PDA and installing the software," said Steve Bennett,
sales director at the software's creator Dolphin Computer Access
(http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/index_dca.htm). It will work with the
Windows CE operating platform and the objective, Bennett said, is to
adapt it for use with the majority of existing PDA brands.
 
While as yet unnamed, it may be called HAL for PDAs.
 
According to Bennett, vision-impaired PDA users previously had to
buy specialist hardware which was costly and only manufactured in
small quantities.
 
However, according to Bill Alker of the RNIB press office, other
companies designing accessible PDAs are "talking down" the new
development, suggesting such "add-on" technology could never be as
good as a product with built-in accessibility.
 
"Other companies have tried to get into the PDA market by putting a
screen reader on top of existing PDAs," said Jonathan Mosen of Pulse
Data International (http://www.pulsedata.com), which produces the
BrailleNote PK, a PDA with an interface designed for blind people.
"However the 'P' in PDA stands for 'personal,' and our research has
shown that what's most important is how quickly you can get
information in and out of the device. KeySoft, our blindness-specific
interface, is efficient yet intuitive."
 
However Richard Orme, assistant director of ICT services at the RNIB,
said the Braillenote PK was the subject of controversy on its release, as
it cost some 3,500 pounds.
 
The debate will continue at Techshare, to be held in Birmingham, UK
tomorrow and Friday. Other highlights include a presentation by Web
Accessibility Initiative director Judy Brewer. Full Techshare reporting
will appear in our December issue.
 
 
++News in Brief:
 
+05: Judicial Correction: Cynthia Waddell, Executive Director of the
International Center for Disability Resources on the Internet and a
leading expert on accessibility law, has written in to correct
"significant errors" in the article we ran in our last issue headed 'US
law unravels over the web'. The article related to the application of US
disability law to web sites, and her letter is carried in our Inbox section
(see story number 8, Section two, this issue), along with a similar
contribution from another reader, Sailesh Panchang. E-Access Bulletin
regrets any inaccuracies contained in our previous article, and is
grateful to Cynthia Waddell and Sailesh Panchang for their
contributions.
 
+06: Accessible Result: A search engine that only returns accessible
web sites and rates them for accessibility for any query entered is to be
formally launched by the end of the month. Web site consultancy Net
Progress's 'Net-guide' currently features 1,000 sites from around the
world in its database:
http://www.net-guide.co.uk .
 
+07: Class Mate: A new version of accessible software for students to
assist writing, vocabulary-building and document preparation using
Macintosh computers has been launched by US assistive technology
company Kurzweil Educational Systems. 'Kurzweil 3000 Macintosh
Version 3' allows students to access personal files and settings
regardless of which computer on the network they use:
http://www.kurzweiledu.com/press_102004.asp .
 
[Section One ends].
 
 
++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.
 
Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .
 
+08: US Law: Cynthia Waddell, Executive Director of the
International Center for Disability Resources on the Internet, writes in
to correct "significant errors" in the article we ran in our last issue
headed 'US law unravels over the web' (issue 59, October 2004). She
says: "Unfortunately, the Southwest Airlines accessible web case has
generated a number of misleading articles in the US and abroad
regarding the status of accessible web and disability rights in the US.
 
"It is not true that the US Court of Appeals ruled on whether or not
organisations providing online services needed to comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). In fact, the court did not reach
that issue and simply dismissed the case due to procedural issues.
Contrary to what was reported, this means that the court did not rule on
the merits of the case and did not uphold the lower court ruling. As the
court stated in their opinion, none of the issues on appeal were properly
before them and so they were unable to reach the merits of the case.
(See page two of the opinion filed September 24, 2004 -
http://fastlink.headstar.com/findlaw1). In fact, one of the difficult
issues before the lower court was the fact that airlines such as
Southwest are generally not covered by the ADA, but by another
disability access statute, the pre-ADA Air Carrier Access Act.
 
"However, the US Court of Appeals opinion noted that even though
the merits of the Southwest Airlines case could not be evaluated, the
court found that the legal questions are significant. The court stated
that "The internet is transforming our economy and culture, and the
question whether it is covered by the ADA - one of the landmark civil
rights laws in this country - is of substantial importance."
 
"Readers may be interested to know that at this time in the US, our
courts are split on the purely legal question as to whether or not the
ADA applies to private web sites. Our case law is behind the times,
hence the statement by the US Court of Appeals that this is a
significant legal question.
 
"As for government web sites, which are not private or commercial
web sites, Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended
by the 1998 Rehabilitation Act Amendments, requires US federal
government web sites be accessible. Today, many states across our
nation have also adopted Section 508 accessible web design
requirements, either by statute or by policy. As a result, non-
governmental organisations using state funding may also be subject to
the requirements of accessible web design."
 
Sailesh Panchang, senior accessibility engineer at Deque Systems in
Virginia, writes to comment on the same article: "I was distressed to
note that the bulletin has not correctly portrayed the recent ruling
regarding Southwest Airlines and the ADA. The decision was largely
based on procedural grounds and the judge recognised the significance
of an inaccessible web site (for a media report see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/ada1).
 
"I feel such unfair portrayal of facts by your newsletter misinforms
readers and is a disservice to web accessibility efforts. Additionally,
the ADA in the US predates the internet and hence makes no
references to web accessibility. The UK's DDA was passed in 1995
and could not have ignored the web."
 
 
+09: Sign Here: Further to our ongoing debate on 'Chip and Pin' bank
payment cards, our reader Estelita from Derbyshire writes in to
respond to Debbie Payne's account of problems with signatures. "I
understand her feelings as I myself experienced the same," she says.
"The time came that I had to provide my signature, and my teacher
suggested using my right thumb mark next to my name printed by
whoever is there to assist me. This system was accepted in Philippines
and Canada but here in England, I don't think it is.
 
"My thumb mark is easy to use: I have a rubber self-inking name pad
to stamp my name on, and then I have to ink my thumb to sign. This
type of signature cannot be forged or stolen. In some cases, Chip and
Pin appears to be the best solution; so what if keypads are different?
We can learn different ways of using them and it's not hard to do, just
get on with it! What do you think readers?"
 
 
+10: PHP Course: In response to last issue's request from the E-Access
Bulletin team for online PHP resources, Rich Caloggero from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Adaptive Technology for
Information and Computing department writes: "The site
http://www.php.net/ is one of the best I've seen. I learned the language
from the site, and its reference manual is excellent and a snap to use,
even via screen reader."
 
 
+11: Online Therapy: Our reader Tamera Snelling from the US would
like to invite readers interested in massage therapy to join the first e-
group of visually impaired and blind massage therapists. The 'BLMT'
group (http://health.groups.yahoo.com/group/BLMT/), hosted by
Yahoo groups, is aimed at helping people share tips and ideas in
handling their practice of massage therapy in relationship to vision
impairment and or blindness.
 
Tamera says: "The group was formed over two years ago and is a place
for those considering training to those who have been in practice for
many years to network and share ideas related to the profession of
Massage therapy. Yahoo doesn't do a very good job at responding to
those of us needing the visual code to join their groups but typically an
email sent to subscribe-blmt@yahoogroups.com will get you in."
 
[Section Two ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.
 
Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.
 
All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Three: Web accessibility
- Speech enabling II
 
+12: The Controversial Voice of the Web: Part II.
by Julie Hill.
 
Our recent discussion about the relative merits of software to "speech-
enable" web sites (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 57, September 2004)
provoked responses from vendors and web accessibility experts alike.
 
Products such as Browsealoud (http://www.browsealoud.com) and
ReadSpeaker (http://www.readspeaker.com) are available to web site
owners to allow their site's content to be "read" to users using a
computer-generated voice. The web owner pays the service provider an
annual subscription, while users can access the service for free using a
browser plug-in.
 
In our September article Julie Howell, digital policy development
officer at the RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk), criticised these text-to-
speech solutions as having limited value for blind and visually
impaired people. She said that they were a "poor substitute for access
solutions, such as screen readers and screen magnifiers", and that web
owners would do better to concentrate their accessibility efforts on the
World Wide Web Consortium's Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI -
http://www.w3.org/WAI) guidelines, which are "freely available and
have the advantage of opening access to all users, using any
technology."
 
Both vendors interviewed in the original feature, ReadSpeaker and
Browsealoud, emphasise that their software wasn't intended as a
substitute for implementing the WAI guidelines. Indeed they say that
in order for their products to work effectively, a web site has to be
designed in an accessible way in the first place.
 
"ReadSpeaker has the same requirements on accessibility as a screen
reader," says Carin Lennartsson, head of ReadSpeaker UK. "So it isn't
a matter of simply adding ReadSpeaker instead of making the site
compliant with the WAI guidelines."
 
Gary Morrison of Texthelp (http://www.texthelp.com), the company
behind Browsealoud, concurs. "The more accessible the web site, the
more likely it is to be accommodating to assistive technology, such as
screen readers and text-to-speech software. This means that the blind
person with software such as JAWS can read the text on a site, as can a
person with dyslexia with a screen reader like Browsealoud."
 
Both companies emphasised that their products weren't intended to
replace screen readers used by blind and visually impaired people to
access web sites. "We make it clear that our product isn't aimed
primarily at the blind and visually impaired communities," says
Lennartsson. "These people will continue to need screen readers in
order to access web sites."
 
Browsealoud and ReadSpeaker read out web content as the user scrolls
over it with the cursor. So the fact that users need to be able to find a
web site in the first place and see the cursor to navigate precludes the
usefulness of these products for blind people.
 
However, both companies cite people with mild visual impairments as
one of their target groups. Indeed Texthelp says that it modified the
beta version of Browsealoud in order to make it more user-friendly as a
result of feedback from visually impaired users. The current version of
Browsealoud includes a colour highlighter, which highlights the text
being read out as the user moves their mouse. This feature helps people
with visual impairments and other users to navigate sites more easily,
says McKay.
 
Meanwhile ReadSpeaker says that its product has been welcomed -
and in some cases adopted - by blind and visually impaired advocacy
groups in other countries. For example, Synskadades Riksforbund
(http://www.srfriks.org), the Swedish Association of the Visually
Impaired, uses ReadSpeaker on its web site. "There are many people
out there who are not our members, but they still have a milder visual
impairment and may not have access to assistive technology," says
Vivianne Emanuelsson of Synskadades Riksforbund. "So 'talking' web
sites can still be of use."
 
However, the primary audiences for these technologies, say the
vendors, are people with dyslexia, people with low literacy and reading
skills, people whose first language isn't English and anyone else who,
for whatever reason, might have difficulty browsing and reading
content online. These target groups constitute a significant proportion
of web users, says David Sloan of the Digital Media Access Group at
the University of Dundee (http://www.dmag.org.uk).
 
"I agree [with Julie Howell] wholeheartedly that these solutions are not
appropriate for people who already use screen reading technology to
access the web," says Sloan. "However, to discount them as not
benefiting the accessibility of the web as a whole is, I feel, failing to
take into account all those other people who can see but have difficulty
reading on-screen content."
 
One of the merits of text-to-speech technologies is that they are free for
users. Indeed Texthelp says that it originally developed Browsealoud
as an e-government product, so that citizens from lower socio-
economic backgrounds with reading or print difficulties would be able
to access online public services from which they would otherwise be
excluded.
 
The RNIB acknowledges that, unlike user access tools such as screen
readers which are prohibitively expensive for the majority of blind and
visually impaired people, the fact that these solutions are available to
users for free is commendable. However, it is also wary of their
commercial nature. "The RNIB continues to lobby for web
accessibility based on the WAI guidelines," says Howell. "They are
available for free in the public domain and we aren't keen to endorse
solutions where there is a cost involved."
 
In Sloan's view, the proliferation of automated text-to-speech
solutions, such as Browsealoud and ReadSpeaker, should be
encouraged, because they contribute towards making the web
accessible to more people. And they don't have a negative impact on
traditional access technologies such as screen readers used by blind
and visually impaired people. "I don't believe that if such solutions
become more widespread, then screen reader users will be adversely
affected or forced to use the site's proprietary text-to-speech solution,"
he says. "In fact, screen reader users may well benefit from being part
of a larger group who listens to rather than sees web sites."
 
However, if competing text-to-speech solutions proliferate, one of the
dangers is that users will become confused, says Sloan. "There will be
a lack of standard method for enabling the text-to-speech facility of a
particular web site," he says. "Where's the button to listen to this page?
In the top left or top right of the page? What will it look like?"
 
One of the RNIB's main concerns is that web owners will see these
solutions as a quick fix for accessibility. "There is the very real risk
that some web managers will regard these speech systems as all they
need to make their web site accessible, ignoring all of the other issues
that go into making a site truly accessible," said Smillie. Howell
agrees: "We fear that [text-to-speech software] isn't a complete
solution and emphasise that it shouldn't act as an alternative to
following WAI guidelines."
 
The vendors maintain that this worry is unfounded, however - not least
because their technologies only work effectively if the web site
concerned has already been designed to be compliant with the WAI
guidelines.
 
Howell agrees: "As long as organisations understand the context of
why WAI is so important, they can add specialist solutions to speech-
enable web sites for the benefit of wider groups".
 
[Section Three ends].
 
 
++Section Three: Focus - handheld computers
+13: A guided tour of PAC Mate
by John M. Williams
 
 The PAC Mate
(http://www.freedomscientific.com/fs_products/PACmate2.asp), a
personal data assistant (PDA) for people who are blind, was introduced
by Freedom Scientific and Microsoft Corporation in October 2002.
There are two versions of the PAC Mate. The BNS version uses an
eight-dot Braille keyboard: thus, a user needs familiarity with inputting
Braille symbols, but does not necessarily need to read print or
refreshable Braille. The TNS version uses a standard Qwerty keyboard.
 
The PAC Mate offers anytime, anywhere access to documents and web
content through the Windows CE operating system, Microsoft Pocket
PC technology and JAWS screen reader speech technology. JAWS is
PAC Mate's backbone.
 
The device's screen reader technology allows blind and low-vision
users to hear documents, images and web content. It integrates with
desktop software and other Pocket PC devices, takes notes, and allows
users to make and track appointments in real-time.
 
There is a PCMCIA connection for either a dial-up or broadband
optional modem (56K, Ethernet) or peripheral plug-ins such as a
micro-drive, diskette drive or CD-ROM. Using a modem, users surf the
internet and send and receive emails.
 
There is a USB port for connection with desktops, laptops, printers and
other devices in either host or client mode. Other functions include a
calculator, linear formatting editor, clock and stopwatch. An Infrared
Data Association (IrDA) port allows the user to transfer files between
PAC Mate and other PC products. For example, users can transfer an
Excel worksheet, from their PAC Mate to their desktop or laptop, or
vice versa. The document exchange can be accomplished wirelessly,
thus providing document management within the Windows
environment.
 
The PAC Mate accesses streaming media with synthesizer speech on
the same sound card, so users can listen to internet broadcasts through
Pocket Internet Explorer.
 
Braille users can input in Grade 2 Braille, and at the end of 2002,
Freedom Scientific released the PAC Mate BNS with Braille-in and
speech-out capabilities and the PAC Mate TNS with speech output.
These models were followed by 20- and 40-cell refreshable Braille
options.
 
There is a Compact Flash port for unlimited document storage capacity
when used with commercial data storage cards and a serial port for use
in those circumstances where a USB and an lrDA are not applicable for
connectivity.
 
How easy is it to learn to use PAC Mate? I am told by Freedom
Scientific's marketing director Scott Meyers that people familiar with
the JAWS screen reader and Windows applications such as Word,
Excel, Internet Explorer and Outlook will require little training to
become proficient with its use. Meyers concedes that learning curves
vary from person to person.
 
Future PDAs from other companies will have a global positioning
system (GPS) integrated. Freedom Scientific has already worked with
VisuAide of Canada for an optional GPS component to provide
orientation by describing surroundings and assist in directing users to a
predefined location. The GPS function was made available in 2003.
 
The PAC Mate is an excellent product with benefits to blind, vision
impaired and learning disabled individuals working and studying. In
fact, it can surpass its promise to play a key role in empowering and
increasing the productivity of persons with disabilities in the work
force provided it reaches a wider market and its price drops.
 
PAC Mate BNS and TNS both cost 2,595 dollars. This includes the
carrying case but does not include the modem. Buyers can offset the
cost by trading in an older model Freedom Scientific notetaker.
Nevertheless the high price tag prohibits many students and
professionals with disabilities, as well as schools, from buying the
product.
 
Students with disabilities can gain particular benefits from the PAC
Mate as it provides them with tools they need to compete in the IT
field now. While middle grade students without disabilities are already
using Compaq iPAQs, PalmPilots and other handheld communications
devices, students with disabilities need access to handheld assistive
technology such as the PAC Mate sooner rather than later.
 
The BNS version is approximately 10 inches across at the bottom of
the unit and approximately 6 inches in height, and weighs a little more
than 1 and a half pounds with the user-replaceable battery installed.
The TNS model is 12 inches across and 6 inches in height and weighs
just more than 2 pounds with the battery. Because both models are
really too large to fit in a pocket, the name "Pocket PC" is something
of a misnomer. But the usefulness of the device is unquestionable.
 
NOTE: An earlier version of this article was first published by the
National Organization on Disability web site in the US. John Williams
is an author and journalist specialising in assistive technologies.
 
[Section Four ends].
 
 
++END NOTES.
 
+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.
 
To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.
 
Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .
 
Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.
 
+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.
 
ISSN 1476-6337 .
 
[Issue ends.] 
