+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 58, OCTOBER 2004.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++Issue 58 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Chip and PIN bank card system under fire
- accessibility criticised.

02: US law unravels over the web
- ADA confusion continues.

03: Online forms could boost patient power
- NHS consults disability groups.


News in brief: 04: Government resource - global plan; 05: Openly
accessible - developer tools; 06: Employers' guide - accessible
recruitment

Section Two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
07: Supermarket reprise - mixed messages; 08: Tiresias location - font
download; 09: Musical advice - useful resources; 10: Course request -
accessible PHP; 11: Inspirational stories - leads sought;
12: Two requests: banking law and magazine site.

Section Three: Focus - internet TV.
13: Community of the future: Internet TV station AT508.com grew out
of a stream of emails to a journalist about anti-discrimination law, but
today viewers include blue-chip companies and White House staff.
Mel Poluck charts its progress.

Section Four: Web standards - HTML.
13: Strict standards make accessible sites: You don't need to be an
expert to design an accessible web site. By using code that complies
with standards, even a beginner can build web pages that are
accessible, says Jim Byrne.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: Techshare 2004
- 18-19 November 2004, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK

The RNIB's Techshare 2004 conference is an important event for
professionals who are interested in technology and the role it plays in
learning, work and society for people with sight problems.

For further information email
techshare@rnib.org.uk or visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare .

[Special notice ends].


++Section One: News.


+01: 'Chip And Pin' Bank Card System Under Fire.

High street retailers face prosecution under the Disability
Discrimination Act because new 'Chip and PIN' technology being
introduced across the UK may not be accessible to people with
disabilities, according to Qm Group (http://www.Qmgroup.com), a
designer of public information and queue management systems.

The chip and PIN technology is designed to combat fraud by requiring
customers to input a number at the point of sale instead of signing for
purchases. It has currently been introduced in some 438,000 retail
outlets across the UK and all retailers must adopt the technology by
January 2005 if they wish to remain protected by banks against
fraudulent transactions.

However, most keypads for inputting PIN numbers aren't accessible to
people with disabilities, says Qm Group. They lack inclusive design
features, such as display screens capable of showing large numbers and
letters, keyboards with tactile markings, a "pip" on the number 5 key to
provide a reference point for vision impaired people, and separate
colour schemes for numerical and function keys. Qm has also criticised
the physical location of keypads on counters, which it says makes them
inaccessible to wheelchair users.

But the chip and PIN programme management organisation
(http://www.chipandpin.co.uk), set up by the British Retail Consortium
(http://www.brc.org.uk) and the financial clearing house APACS
(http://www.apacs.org.uk), has hit back at the Qm claims. It says it ran
trials that included vision impaired people, which showed that 93 per
cent of vision impaired people were happy using chip and PIN.

The organisation also says that the vast majority of keypads not only
incorporate the "pip" on the number 5 key to aid navigation for blind
and visually impaired users, but also have an extendable cord so they
can be used below counter level by wheelchair users. It says
accessibility advice was issued to all keypad manufacturers - around
five firms in all - although it admits the devices do not conform to a
standard design.

However Paul Snee, inclusivity manager at Qm Group, says it is this
lack of conformity that is causing problems. "The cancel and clear
keys are in different places on different keypads," said Snee. "Some of
the keys are vertical and some are horizontal and they don't include
tactile markings. This hardware marginalises and discriminates against
those with disabilities."


+02: US Disability Law Unravels Over Web.

A US court of appeal has ruled that organisations providing online
services don't need to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA - http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/statute.html), adding to
confusion about how anti-discrimination legislation applies to web
sites in the US.

The decision, which upholds a 2002 ruling by a district judge that the
ADA applies only to physical spaces and not to web sites, once again
highlights ambiguities in the law, which is interpreted differently from
state to state.

The lawsuit was originally filed by campaign group Access Now
(http://www.adaaccessnow.org/) and blind web user Robert Gumson
against Southwest Airlines (http://www.southwest.com). They argued
it was "extremely difficult" for vision impaired people to buy tickets
on the Southwest web site, that there were no text alternatives to
graphics, and that navigating the site was difficult.

In October 2002, a Florida district judge rejected the Gumson claim on
the grounds that the ADA doesn't apply to web sites, and it is this
decision that has been upheld by the court of appeal. However, since
the original lawsuit Southwest has redesigned its web site to make it
easier to use by vision impaired people.

This latest ruling follows hot on the heels of a case in August, which
produced the opposite outcome, with the New York State Attorney-
General forcing two high-profile leisure companies to make their web
sites fully accessible after ruling that they were in violation of the
ADA (see E-Access Bulletin, September 2004).

The ADA dictates that "all places of public accommodation" and "all
goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodation"
must be made accessible to people with disabilities. But it was made
law before the internet became mainstream, and doesn't explicitly
mention web sites.

There is no such ambiguity in the UK's Disability Discrimination Act
and the supporting codes of practice published by the Disability Rights
Commission (http://www.drc-gb.org), which make it clear that web site
owners must make their sites accessible to people with disabilities or
face legal action.


+03: Online Forms Could Boost Patient Power.

Disability groups are being consulted about a service that would enable
patients to supply details of their symptoms, medical history and
treatment preferences online ahead of a consultation with a doctor or
clinician, reducing the need for basic and often repetitive questions to
be asked at each appointment.

At a meeting this month organised by the British Computer Society
Disability Group (http://fastlink.headstar.com/bcs2), NHS
policymakers met with disability groups to gauge demand for such a
service, which is increasingly used by healthcare providers in the US
and mainland Europe but has yet to be adopted by the health service
here.

The service would prompt patients to supply information through a
structured online questionnaire. "An awful lot of information could be
provided in advance," said Brian Layzell of the British Computer
Society. "People with disabilities could find such a service particularly
useful."

Although the NHS has not committed itself to rolling out the service,
Layzell is confident the government will support further tests of
commercially available products. "One of the outcomes of the meeting
is likely to be a pilot project launching early next year," he said.


++News in Brief:

+04: GOVERNMENT RESOURCE: A free CD-ROM containing new
resources on eye conditions is being sent to all governments for World
Sight Day on 14 October as part of the VISION 2020 global prevention
of blindness plan:
http://www.v2020.org/world_sight_day .

+05: OPENLY ACCESSIBLE: A new set of tools enabling C++
software developers to build Linux-based solutions that are accessible
to screen readers has been released by software specialists Trolltech:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/trolltech1 .

+06: EMPLOYERS' GUIDE: A guide for companies on the accessible
recruitment of staff online has been published by the Employers'
Forum on Disability in conjunction with the London Development
Agency. 'Barrier-free e-recruitment: recruiting disabled people online'
costs 15 pounds for members and 25 for non-members:
http://www.barrierfree-recruitment.com/publication.htm

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.

Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.

Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.

For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: SUPERMARKET REPRISE: Further to our recent discussion
about problems with the Tesco supermarket's web site and credit card
purchasing systems, Jonathan Tyrer of the RNIB says: "I've been using
the Tesco access site for over two years now. I've had the odd problem,
but on the whole I think it's a fantastic service and it annoys me when I
see the sort of negative, unhelpful comments you've had in your last
two issues. If people don't like it, don't use it - get a taxi and go
yourself! Good luck!"

And further to the related discussion of the accessibility of the new
'Chip and PIN' credit card authentication system, Debbie Payne of
Hereford responds to Danielle Cleary's account of being refused a
purchase after her signatures didn't match, even though she was blind.
"I'm horrified by the treatment she received. I've suffered similar
discrimination in a well known high street shoe store. I was also told
that my signatures didn't match, so I kicked up a stink and threatened
to report the store for their treatment. For the record, I did leave the
store with my shoes. However, that's by the by. The point I'd like to
make, is that both Danielle and myself are a case in point in support of
Chip and PIN. For heaven's sake, let's stop bleating about how difficult
or not it might be, let's embrace it and look forward positively to our
new freedom to shop with confidence." [Further responses to
inbox@headstar.com].

+08: TIRESIAS LOCATION: In our April issue (issue 52) John
Taylor wrote in to recommend a font called Tiresias LP which
has been designed for people with eyesight problems. This month
he adds: "This font can be purchased through:
http://www.tiresias.org/fonts/ for around 30 US Dollars or so."

+09: MUSICAL ADVICE: Following last issue's request from our
reader Estelita from Derbyshire for information about accessible music
resources, both Claire Gailans and D.P.M. Weerakkody, Professor of
Western classics at the University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka, write in to
offer themselves as email penpals to help Estelita. Professor
Weerakkody writes: "Although I teach classics (Greek and Latin), I
pursue music as a hobby, and can play some keyboard and wind
instruments - with mistakes."

Claire Williams writes in to suggest the web site
http://www.dab.org.uk as a useful resource; and Chris McMillan says:
"Estelita may like to contact the Visually Impaired Musicians
Association, an organisation of blind and partially sighted musicians
and music lovers. Telephone Barbara Leighton on 0208-366-6019,
email: barbara.leighton@talk21.com or visit:
http://www.uk-piano.org.uk/vima/

+10: COURSE REQUEST: E-Access Bulletin is looking for an
accessible course or training materials for one of its staff to learn Linux
web programming language PHP. Has anybody used any good PHP
learning resources or been on a PHP course they can recommend?
Please reply to: inbox@headstar.com .

+11: INSPIRATIONAL STORIES: The same Estelita has a powerful
suggestion for a possible series of future articles for E-Access Bulletin
- for which we shall need our readers' help. She says: "I would
recommend that if it is possible that you could add a short story of any
disabled people who successfully reached their goal regardless of their
disabilities to each issue. It will give more interest to the readers, and
also it will bring encouragement or a sense of enlightenment to people
who perhaps feel sorry for themselves." So if you feel you have been
through a struggle whose outcome might inspire other readers of the
bulletin in their own lives, or have a tale to tell of a friend or colleague
who is inspirational, please write in and let us know at
inbox@headstar.com .

+12: TWO REQUESTS: Beryl Williams of Saskatchewan, Canada
asks: "I would be interested to learn if there is UK anti-discrimination
legislation, governing the banking industry, in respect to alternate
formats, electronic and telephone banking services for blind, deaf/blind
and partially sighted customers." Responses please to
inbox@headstar.com .

And George Cassell, editor of the international publication Blind
World Magazine, would be grateful for assistance or advice that
readers might like to offer him on the accessibility of the title's web
site:
http://www.blindworld.net
[Please email responses direct to George on
blindworld@earthlink.net].

[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three: Focus: internet TV
+12: Community of the Future
by Mel Poluck.

AT508.com (http://www.at508.com) is an internet TV station
dedicated to Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act
(http://www.section508.gov/), the part of US law which requires US
federal government agencies to make their information technology
accessible to people with disabilities.

The channel provides a forum for live debate and links government
agency representatives, the public, technology companies and
advocacy groups, bringing together key players in the field of access
technology. Webcast panel discussions allow viewers and listeners to
interact with guests by email and the station also covers major events
such as the international assistive technology conference 'CSUN'
(http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf/).

According to Dave Gardy, chief executive of the station's creator TV
Worldwide (http://www.tvworldwide.com), the service has grown into
one of the most active of their 20 internet television stations.

AT508.com founder and technology journalist John Williams first
approached Gardy about starting up the channel after he started
receiving enquiries about the new legislation. "I saw the deed on 508
become closer to becoming law [and] started to get a lot of calls and
emails asking me questions about 508," Williams says.

Launched two years ago at the World Congress on Disabilities
(http://www.wcdexpo.com) in Florida, Gardy says webcasts regularly
receive around 30,000 viewers and listeners and up to 200 emails per
webcast. With around five per cent of content available only by pay-
per-view, most of the site is free to access, with the service gaining
most of its revenue from corporate sponsorship.

There are three main advantages of web broadcasting compared with
TV or radio broadcasting, Gardy says: "The distinct advantages are the
interactivity; the archivability and most importantly, the community."

A hot topic currently under discussion on the channel is the effects of
the law on the IT giants. "They are frustrated because several
[government] agencies are not enforcing it. Businesses supported 508
in the belief that once they showed the will to support 508, the
administration would, then there would be a trickle-down effect,"
Williams says.

But channel AT508.com webcasts are not always free of controversy.
"There have been shows that have not pleased the government,"
Williams says. "But that's OK, because the government has to be taken
to task when it doesn't do its job."

Last year, Williams and Gardy planned a show with representatives
from federal government and the American Association of People with
Disabilities (http://www.aapd-dc.org). "Our aim was to talk about the
strengths and weaknesses of Section 508. We got a lot of calls from
government and businesses," he says. Specifically the team were
warned that strong criticisms of government or business could lose the
channel goodwill and support.

"We sat down and I said let's do this. We can't afford to buckle, that
goes against everything democracy stands for. We got a lot of feedback
from government listeners [who] said they liked it. They liked the fact
we weren't ducking issues," Williams says. However, the White House
called Williams to tell him they disapproved.

One major annoyance for Williams is that few government
departments take a strong approach to compliance, and no single
agency is given responsibility for enforcing Section 508. "[The
Department of Homeland Security] could be role models for enforcing
508," he says. "Some departments within federal agencies were
enforcing 508 and most were not." This, he said, inspired yet another
show.

"It's an emerging field which is probably still in its embryonic stages,
but one of these days, it's just going to zoom," Williams says. "I think
you'll see that in the next five years." It seems as if the panellists will
have plenty to talk about on AT508.com for some time to come.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Web Standards
- HTML.

+13: Strict Standards Make Accessible Sites
by Jim Byrne.

There have been many different versions of Hypertext Markup
Language (HTML) since the World Wide Web was invented in the
early 1990s by Tim Berners-Lee. The rules for each version are
encapsulated in the standards published by the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C).

The standards dictate the tags publishers are allowed to use, and in
what order, and how those tags should be interpreted by browsers. For
example, text within header tags are interpreted as headings, text
within paragraph tags are interpreted as paragraphs, and so on.

It is said, usually with irony, that the great thing about standards is that
there are so many to choose from, and in this case it is quite true.
However, if you are beginner, you won't go far wrong if you decide to
use the latest and final version of HTML released by the W3C, which
is known as HTML 4.01 Strict. This is a good standard to adopt as it
will never change, giving a solid, reliable way to mark up your pages
that web browsers will understand for a good while yet.

The 'Strict' part of the name means that you should not use tags and
attributes that are no longer part of the final HTML standard. The
jargon used when referring to these non-standard tags and attributes is
'deprecated'. Staying away from deprecated tags and attributes removes
a few more potential barriers to accessibility for your visitors.

Using HTML in a standard way means you have to put the correct tags
around the appropriate document structures. Headings should be
marked up using heading tags, lists should be marked up using list
tags, passages of quotation should be marked up with the blockquote
element, and so on. The W3C provide a free validation tool to check
whether your document is valid HTML: http://validator.w3.org/ .

Once a document has been created using standard HTML you can alter
the way it is presented by using different 'style sheets' in much the
same way you can alter the look of the text in a Microsoft Word
document. Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) contain information to set,
among other things, the size and colour of headings, the justification of
text, the layout of the page, and so on. In other words CSS should be
used to provide information about how the page looks for visual users,
and in more general terms, how it is presented to different types of user
and 'user agents', such as browsers for example.

HTML should ideally be used only to markup the structure of your
document, indicating what bits are headings, paragraphs, list, quotes,
and so on, with CSS being used to determine how the document looks.
By separating structure from presentation you are creating more
flexible pages because a given user can then apply their own style
sheet so that the content is presented in a way that suits their needs. On
pages that do not use standard markup, style sheets may not work as
expected.

Using standard Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) ensures that
your pages will work on the widest range of hardware and software,
including screen readers, for example. Pages using standard markup
will also work more consistently on a wider range of browsers.

Further developments such as XHTML aim to provide more flexible
and intelligent ways of adding labels to your web published
documents. XHTML, for example, makes it easier for computers to
process and transform documents into different formats. If you are a
more experienced coder and you have the tools to ensure that you don't
make mistakes when marking up documents, you may prefer to use
XHTML 1 Strict. Adopting this more up-to-date standard will assist
with accessibility, and help to 'future-proof' your pages.

NOTE: Jim Byrne has been an accessible web design consultant since
1996. He is a web designer, LAMP Web applications developer, author
and founder of the Guild of Accessible Web Designers. The original
version of this article can be found at:
http://www.gawds.org/show.php?contentid=104 .

[Section Four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

