+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- Issue 57, September 2004.
 
Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).
 
NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .
 
 
++Issue 57 Contents.
 
Section One: News.
 
01: Public sector bodies to face IT access pressure
- draft legislation urges more action on equal opportunities.
 
02: US lawsuit sends web design warning to UK companies
- leisure companies forced to redesign sites.
 
03: First magnifier software launched for mobile phones
- download available by end of this month.
 
04: Paralympic web site fails to learn lessons of the past
- report finds problems still rife despite pledges.
 
News in brief: 05: Jungle venture - accessible game; 06: Tester
requester - Apple screenreader; 07: Easy read - font download.
 
Section Two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: More chips - banking issues; 09: Seeking musicians - request for
resources; 10: Supermarket issues - shopping gloom; 11: Pool tester -
speaking device.
 
Section Three: Focus - Speech-enabled web sites.
12: The controversial voice of the web: An increasing number of sites
are using 'speech-enabling' software designed to help vision-impaired
users. But, as Mel Poluck reports, not everyone is convinced that this is
the best way forward.
 
Section Four: Web standards - Access keys.
13: The future of access keys: Keyboard shortcuts can be useful, but
their implementation is often problematic, says Derek Featherstone.
Now the World Wide Web Consortium is trying to improve the
concept.
 
[Contents ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Techshare 2004
- 18-19 November 2004, Jury's Inn, Birmingham, UK
 
The RNIB's Techshare 2004 conference is an important event for
professionals who are interested in technology and the role it plays in
learning, work and society for people with sight problems.
 
For further information email
techshare@rnib.org.uk or visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section One: News.
 
+01: Public Sector Bodies to Face IT Access Pressure.
 
Public sector employers in the UK are set to face stronger pressure to
ensure their IT systems are accessible to people with disabilities under
draft legislation that could become law as early as November. The
proposed Disability Bill (http://fastlink.headstar.com/bill2) would
require public agencies to take a more active approach to assisting
employees with disabilities.
 
The draft law, which builds on the current Disability Discrimination
Act 1995, sets out a general duty for the public sector to "promote
equality of opportunity between disabled persons and other persons by
improving opportunities for disabled persons." This is significantly
stronger than existing law, which only requires organisations to avoid
discrimination. In particular, the changes would increase pressure on
public sector bodies to take accessibility into account when procuring
new IT systems and equipment.
 
The draft is set to be given a final reading in Parliament next month,
and barring events such as an early general election, could be included
in the government's next legislative programme to be announced in the
Queen's speech in November.
 
The latest government figures indicate that the public sector employs a
total of around 5.5 million people, and rising: employment in the
public sector is now 10 per cent higher than in 1998.
 
 
+02: US Lawsuit Sends Web Design Warning to UK Companies.
 
A US lawsuit which has forced two high profile leisure companies to
make their web sites accessible should act as a warning to UK firms to
shape up or face similar action, according to the RNIB
(http://www.rnib.org.uk).
 
Last month the New York State Attorney-General
(http://www.oag.state.ny.us) ordered hotel operator Ramada
(http://www.ramada.com) and travel company Priceline
(http://www.priceline.com) to make changes that will enable users of
assistive technology such as screen readers to more easily navigate
their web sites.
 
The Attorney-General ruled that the companies were in violation of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/statute.html). As well as the remedial
action, they were ordered to pay 40,000 and 37,000 US Dollars
respectively to cover the costs of the investigation.
 
While there is still some argument about whether the ADA covers web
sites at all, no such ambiguity attaches to the UK's Disability
Discrimination Act and the codes of practice published by the
Disability Rights Commission (DRC  http://www.drc-gb.org). These
make it clear that web site owners must make their sites accessible or
face legal action, the RNIB said this month.
 
Although some cases of web site discrimination have been brought in
the UK, to date they have all been settled out of court with
confidentiality as one of the settlement terms. One reason for this is
that web site owners don't want to be the first company to have their
poor accessibility record aired in court, said the DRC.
 
Furthermore the RNIB, which deals with cases of vision-impaired
individuals who have suffered discrimination online, says that its first
priority is always to act in the interests of the complainant, who may
prefer to settle rather than facing the media glare of a high-profile court
case.
 
 
+03: First Magnifier Software Launched For Mobile Phones.
 
The first magnification software for mobile phones will be available by
the end of this month, allowing users of compatible phones to enlarge
their on-screen text by downloading the software over the web.
 
Various areas of a phone's screen display can be magnified, and the
software can be configured to begin working as soon as the phone is
switched on. Mobile Magnifier works with Nokia 3620; 3650; 3660;
6600; 6620; 7610; 7650; N Gage; N Gage QD; and Siemens SX1
handsets.
 
The software, whose price has not yet been decided, has been designed
by Spanish programming company Code Factory
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/code1). Testing for the system was
undertaken by the technology department of Spanish blindness
organisation Organización Nacional de Ciegos de Espana (ONCE -
http://www.once.es).
 
"We believe this will be an exciting development and may well be a
solution for some users," said Steve Tyler, Policy and ICT Access
Manager at the RNIB. "Whether or not magnification software is the
answer remains to be seen through evaluation, but we are clear that in
surveys carried out by service providers, well over 40 per cent of users
comment on not satisfactorily being able to read the screen along with
[problems] accessing very small keys."
 
A web site where people can download Mobile Magnifier and access a
list of distributors is now under construction at
http://www.mobilemagnifier.com . "We have received interest from
many companies and individual users so far and we are now
negotiating with distributors in different countries," said Irja Emma
Gerdes, sales and marketing representative at Code Factory. Until then,
users can purchase the magnifier software via email from Code Factory
and have the option to try it before deciding whether or not a make a
purchase.
 
Code Factory has previously released screen readers for mobile phones
such as Mobile Accessibility (http://mobileaccessibility.codfact.com/)
and Mobile Speak (http://mobilespeak.codfact.com). Mobile Magnifier
is compatible with Mobile Speak, allowing users to hear speech output
and receive magnification simultaneously.
 
 
+04: Paralympic Web Site Fails to Learn Lessons of the Past.
 
Sports fans with impaired vision face problems using the official web
site for the 12th Paralympic Games which start today in Athens,
despite pledges by organisers that they have learned the lessons of
previous failures to make Olympic and Paralympic web sites
accessible, according to a new report.
 
The damning assessment from accessibility experts at City
University's Centre for Human Computer Interaction Design (CHCID
- www-hcid.soi.city.ac.uk) is embarrassing for officials, following
high profile failures in previous games. In 2000, Bruce Maguire won
20,000 dollars compensation from organisers of the Sydney Olympics
over the inaccessibility of its site, and the Salt Lake City Winter
Olympics in 2002 also drew criticism from web accessibility experts
(see E-Access Bulletin, November 2001).
 
Tests by CHCID revealed that the new Paralympics site
((http://www.athens2004.com/en/) is too cluttered and difficult to
navigate for people with sight impairments or dyslexia. It has poor
contrast on some pages, with text on a grey background, and basic
information, such as finding out the date and time of the women's
marathon is difficult to access. Competition schedules are presented in
tables that are hard to access with screen readers, the report finds.
 
"It is particularly disappointing that this site isn't fully accessible, as 
it
is obviously of immense interest to disabled people all over the world,"
said Professor Helen Petrie, who led the testing work. "It could have
been a shining example of how a site can be made interesting and
informative, yet totally accessible." Despite the shortcomings however,
some progress has been made on previous Olympic and Paralympic
sites. For example, images are accompanied by ALT tags to describe
their content, and generally there is a lack of moving text and Flash
content on the site, Petrie said.
 
The Paralympic Games will see some 4,000 disabled athletes from 145
nations compete in Athens, including many competitors who are blind
or vision-impaired.
 
 
++News in Brief:
 
+05: JUNGLE VENTURE: The UK Audio Network, a web site with
resources for blind and visually impaired people, has launched its
fiftieth accessible game: 'Jungle Fever.' Players enter a jungle where
they encounter animals, rickety bridges, volcanoes and lost cities,
answering trivia questions along the way. Designers of the free game
claim no two games will ever be exactly the same:
http://www.yrguk.com/entertainment/jungle/ .
 
+06: TESTER REQUESTER: A team of programmers from US web
design firm Sperling Corporation are seeking blind people to beta-test
a free accessible internet browser for Macintosh computer users, as a
non-profit project. Testers must be blind and have a Macintosh running
OS-X with access to the Internet. If you are interested please send an
email to:
beta@sperling.com .
 
+07: EASY READ: A font designed for vision-impaired people by the
American Printing House for the Blind has been improved to make it
even easier to read, and is available for free download on the web.
APHont now has bold and italic versions, and results from user group
testing found 60 per cent of users preferred it to other fonts:
http://www.aph.org/products/aphont.html .
 
[Section One ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.
 
Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.
 
Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.
 
For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.
 
Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .
 
+08: MORE CHIPS: Further to our recent discussions of 'chip and pin'
authentication systems replacing customer signatures for credit and
debit cards, Katie Ash, manager of educational charity Learning Links,
writes in to say: "I am not a visually impaired person, but used to work
for the Canadian National Institute for the Blind. While there I used to
assist many totally blind people with their shopping.
 
"Canada has had a chip and pin system for years and all of our clients
used it without difficulty. The only thing they had to do was ask the
shop assistants which way around the Cancel and Enter buttons where
as they were different in different shops."
 
Estelita from Derbyshire, who formerly lived in Canada, adds: "I also
strongly agree with the use of Chip and PIN. This is quick and easy
and you don't need to worry counting loose change in front of board
teller and the people behind waiting for their turns.
 
"This system is widely used in Canada as well and what I did was just
look for the number 5 on the keypad and I know the rest. In Canada,
they have slot machine where we swipe our card and all keypads have
a raised dot on number 5, which leads us to the rest of the numbers. So
I think the question here is if the machine and the keypad are
accessible for us visually impaired users not only in UK but also
through out the Europe."
 
On the related issue of telephone banking, she says: "I also recommend
telephone banking as a good alternative. I came from Canada and used
this system out there of all my banking needs and even paying bills
with no problem. This service is available in all banks all over Canada
free of charge not only to the visually impaired but also to all users.
 
"Our bank institution here in Derbyshire offers this service, but I found
it difficult to access because I have to enter letters as part of password
or code which as a totally blind person I couldn't see where it could be
on my phone keypad. So still not accessible unless the telephone
banking system will change the password and code system to all
numbers without any letters."
 
Mike O'Brien of New York state, US, also writes in to add to our
various debates about banking with a note on the potential use of
emails to send out bank statements: "It would seem with good
encryption methods, emailed bank statements would be as secure as
any other method of sending them. No method is completely secure if
an identity theft is determined enough."
 
And on the unrelated story we ran in our last issue (see E-Access
Bulletin, section four, August 2004) on a possible 'Totally Integrated
Portal' to offer access to a wide range of information and services to
people of all abilities, he says: "Concerning the universal portal with
the number-based menu system, it sounds quite similar to the way
gopher used to work."
 
 
+09: SEEKING MUSICIANS: Further to her contribution to our
debate on banking, our reader Estelita from Derbyshire says: "I am
learning how to play musical keyboard and guitar but I can't afford to
go to music school for proper lesson so I'm just teaching myself from
what I can get through the Internet. I wonder if it's possible that you
can pass on my email address to any blind musician to email me for
friendship where we could discuss our interest in keyboard or guitar
playing or perhaps somebody might know of a musical instrument
discussion list that I could join." Anyone who would like to respond
should contact us on inbox@headstar.com and we will pass your
details on to Estelita.
 
 
+10: SUPERMARKET ISSUES: Following our feature last issue about
access to supermakret web sites, Danielle Cleary writes in to say:
"Several times, I have tried to place orders with Tesco and the orders
have gone through fine. However, on all occasions, I have had phone
calls within the hour of supposed delivery time to tell me that my card
has been rejected and did I have another one which I could use instead.
On speaking to my bank, I was informed that there was no reason
whatsoever for this to have happened so I called them back and asked
that they retry my card. It still didn't work.
 
Grudgingly, I said that I would obviously have to come down to the
store to get my shopping and could they please leave it at customer
service. I was told that this wasn't possible and that, if I was going to
come to the store, I would have to go around the store myself and get
my shopping. The shopping that had been picked for me would be
returned to the shelves.
 
So, I asked my mum if she could take me to Tesco so that I could get
my shopping and, luckily, she agreed. So we went around the store and
got my shopping. When we got to the checkout, I paid with my card
and it was authorised no problem. The problem came when I was asked
to sign the receipt. The two signatures didn't match because, obviously,
I can't see what I'm doing. The cashier wouldn't accept my signature.
The manager was called and I was told: "I'm ever so sorry . . . but we
can't be seen to be making allowances for our customers based on such
things or we'd never be able to draw a line." Was he saying that I was
faking being blind?
 
Roll on chip and pin is all I have to say. I can't wait. Both of my cards
are chip and pin now but I've not found anywhere yet where I can use
them. I'm also looking into getting a signature stamp as well. I'm fed
up with the grief that I get.
 
Another reader, Brian Williams, adds: "I have given up on the Tesco
site as, after similar problems with the site and lack of response from
the customer service department. It is interesting to note that each reply
was from a different customer manager - too many chiefs and not
enough indians. All we want, surely, is access to the same goods as
anyone else. Are blind and visually impaired people only allowed
down certain aisles if we physically visit the store?
 
 
+11: POOL TESTER: Nancy Buchanan writes in to ask if anyone
knows of a talking temperature tester for pools. "I have looked around
the US but have not yet found one. This could be very helpful to
persons who are blind that have pools or hot tubs. If you have any
information it will be appreciated." [Answers please to
inbox@headstar.com].
 
[Section Two ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.
 
Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.
 
All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Three: Focus
- Speech-enabled web sites.
 
+12: The Controversial Voice of the Web
by Mel Poluck.
 
One option for ensuring the web is accessible to people with impaired
vision is to enable web sites to "read" their content to users using a
computer-generated voice, a service that is generally free of charge to
the user.
 
The 'speech-enabling' of web sites is gathering momentum and
recognition as more companies emerge in this field and more high-
profile sites use the technologies. Uppsala City Council in Sweden, for
example, recently received an "Excellence in e-government" award
from the European Commission for its implementation on its web site
of one such service from Swedish company ReadSpeaker
(http://www.readspeaker.com).
 
In common with speech simulation technologies in other fields, the
quality of the synthetic voices produced by such solutions has become
quite naturalistic. The voice synthesis used by ReadSpeaker - provided
by Edinburgh based text-to-speech software company Rhetorical,
(http://www.rhetorical.com) - sounds "very human" according to Carin
Lennartsson, head of ReadSpeaker UK. Rhetorical's voice synthesis is
also used by the RNIB for the magazines it published in e-book
standard format, DAISY (http://www.daisy.org).
 
"The intonation is very life-like; you can never get a download with
that kind of quality," Lennartsson says. The service also allows users to
listen to Word, rich text format and PDF file formats, working on any
web browser with a connection speed of at least 33 kilobytes a second.
 
ReadSpeaker software is used by 80 public and private web sites in
Scandinavia, including the Swedish Parliament, and 10 web sites
already use it in the UK including the Dyslexia Institute
(http://www.dyslexia-inst.org.uk/), Lincolnshire County Council
(http://www.lincolnshire.gov.uk/) and public sector community advice
portal CASweb (http://www.casweb.org).
 
"Before ReadSpeaker there was no server-based speech-enabling
solution on the market. Many people with reading difficulties and
disabilities found it difficult to download and to use screen-readers,"
says Niclas Bergstrom, chief executive and founder of Phoneticom
(http://www.phoneticom.com), the company that has developed the
technology for ReadSpeaker. "Furthermore, every upgrade meant that
the user had to re-install the software again," he says.
 
Talking web site technology is useful as a complement to, but not a
replacement for, traditional screen-reader technology, Bergstrom says.
"[Vision impaired people] use their own screen-readers. However, if
the user has a lighter impairment and is still able to navigate and find
the website ReadSpeaker can be of assistance but it can never replace
screen-readers," he says.
 
Another leading solution for the speech-enabling of web sites is
Browsealoud (http://www.browsealoud.com), from Northern Ireland-
based independent software company Texthelp
(http://www.texthelp.com). Browsealoud is designed to work most
effectively with those web sites built with accessibility and WAI
guidelines in mind, according to its head of marketing Ian Stuart.
 
"Auto continuous reading is designed to provide the user with the
ability to have all the content read aloud to them without any user
interaction," Stuart says. "This is of major benefit to users where they
demonstrate the need for digital inclusion, and have trouble using a
pointer device," he says.
 
"The user can also "read" the text on the page in the order that they
want - other systems force the user to read the navigation text on every
page of a web site," Stuart says. "Some web speech-enabling
technologies rely on creating recorded sound files. These systems are
impractical with dynamically generated content such as search engines,
shopping baskets and so on."
 
Browsealoud allows users to read the content of drop down lists as the
mouse is passed over them and the content of text boxes on forms after
the user has typed into them. Besides web site content, it can also read
alt tags, accessible flash and java web site content.
 
Speech output is offered in some 20 US or UK accents, and users can
choose if they want male or female "readers," and change the pitch,
speed and volume of speech to suit their tastes. However, asked how
natural-sounding the voice sounds, Stuart says: "You would still notice
it was computer-generated."
 
Browsealoud can also be modified to read out initials in full. This has
allowed for example, the Department of Health (http://www.dh.gov.uk)
to have recently altered all instances of 'DH' to read 'Department of
Health' and government web site UK Online - now called 'DirectGov'
(http://www.direct.gov.uk) - to change their settings after users heard
"yuke" Online instead of UK Online.
 
Site owners subscribe by downloading a browser plug-in in return for
an annual subscription which varies from 325 pounds per year for non-
profit organisations to around 5,000 pounds for private companies.
Browsealoud currently has around seven hundred subscribers.
 
Not everyone is convinced of the benefits to people with impaired
vision of speech-enabling the web, however. "Solutions such as these
have only limited value to blind and partially sighted people," says
Julie Howell, digital policy development officer at the RNIB. "They
are a poor substitute for access solutions such as screen readers and
screen magnification."
 
Neither does the RNIB approve of the commercial flavour of most
speech solutions. "Individual web site owners are required to install the
solution on their server or pay to have use of the product on their web
site," she says. "RNIB strongly discourages this approach in favour of
the [World Wide Web Consortium's] Web Accessibility Initiative
guidelines (WAI - http://www.w3.org/WAI/about.html). The
guidelines are freely available and have the advantage of opening
access to all users, using any technology.
 
"In RNIB's view, speech-enabled web sites bring nothing to the party
and effort would be better spent raising awareness of the WAI
guidelines and promoting best practice in web design," Howell says.
"Why should a blind person be restricted only to the sites that have
been software-enabled? Surely the great attraction of the web is the
endless possibility. The notion that blind and partially sighted people
will be satisfied with only the handful of sites that have adopted these
solutions must be challenged. RNIB believes that disabled people have
the right to visit any web site they choose."
 
[Section Three ends].
 
 
++Special Notice: The UK Association of Braille Producers
Conference
- October 4-5, 2004
- The Albright Hussey Hotel, Shrewsbury.
 
The UK Association of Braille Producers is holding a conference in
Shrewsbury on Monday 4 and Tuesday 5 October 2004. The two days
will be packed with presentations, demonstrations and workshops of
interest to anyone involved in Braille production including staff of
charities, prison Braille units, school resource bases and local societies,
commercial producers, and voluntary transcribers. Topics will include
changes to the Braille code, copyright rules, DAISY, tactile diagrams
and Moon production. Developers of Braille software, embossers and
raised diagram machines will be demonstrating their latest products.
 
For more details and to register see:
http://www.ukabp.org/conference.asp
or email conference@ukabp.org
or phone 0870 765 9388.
 
[Special notice ends].
 
 
++Section Four: Web Standards
- Access Keys.
 
+13: The Future of Access Keys
by Derek Featherstone.
 
Access Keys (or 'accesskeys' as they are commonly known in
technical circles) are keyboard shortcuts on a website that provide the
site user with quick and easy access to areas of a site. The way they
work varies slightly by browser type, but generally they involve hitting
the ALT or CTRL key followed by a number and then often the enter
key as well, allowing the user to jump straight to for example the home
page or the contact details page. There are standard access keys for key
tasks like 1 for the home page and 2 for a site map.
 
My consultancy WATS.ca has carried out extensive research on
accesskey availability. We like the idea behind accesskeys, but find the
implementation very problematic. It boils down to a few key points.
Authors usually define too many accesskeys; they are used
inconsistently across sites; they can cause conflict with other
keystrokes; and usually, they cannot be defined by users or turned off.
 
It appears that a new strategy has emerged in recent efforts by the
World Wide Web Consortium to define new standards for XHTML, a
general purpose markup language. The XHTML 2.0 Working Draft of
July 22, 2004 takes a big step forward by dropping the accesskey
attribute and introducing a much more powerful and flexible access
attribute. This will allow authors to define their own keystrokes to take
them to various defined 'access points.'
 
This significant change means a few things. Authors will no longer
have to worry about keystroke conflicts because it is no longer their
job to define keystrokes. Instead, they can focus on defining logical
and meaningful access points in their documents. Users that really need
and could benefit from this functionality can define their own
keystrokes, eliminating or at least minimising conflict with their
software. Users will also benefit from consistency across sites, because
the keystrokes are defined at the browser level, eliminating the struggle
to remember which keystrokes do what on particular sites.
 
This strategy requires clearly defined access points. Perhaps well-
understood navigation functions such as Search, Home, Help, and
Contact, would be a good place to start. These could be expanded to
include content, form, accessibility, and privacy. This would allow me
as the user to define keystrokes that work across all sites that
implement these access points, and also to create a highly customised
set of keystrokes for working with various web applications that define
additional access points. If I want a particular combination of key
presses to take me to the home page, or search form or page for a site,
then it will work on any site where these access points have been
defined.
 
Looking forward, it might be useful to allow custom keystroke profiles
so that users can create and save different sets of keystrokes for use in
different applications. Site authors could also provide an XML version
of the access points defined with the access attribute so that users could
import the access points directly into one of those custom profiles.
 
This latest XHTML working draft is a very big step forward. It
recognizes that keyboard users are best equipped to edit and add to the
keystrokes they need, and so fits with most of what good design and
standards is about: people, and putting people in control of their own
environment.
 
Unfortunately however, it may be some time before we realize the
benefits of this change in strategy, as XHTML 2.0 may be a long way
from the mainstream. However, there are positive signs. For example,
the Opera browser is already a leader in this respect as they allow the
user to create highly customised keystrokes and multiple keyboard
configurations through their Preferences interface. Let's hope that other
application developers catch up soon.
 
NOTE: Derek Featherstone, a co-founder of Web Accessibility Testing
and Services (WATS.ca - http://www.wats.ca), has worked as a web
developer, consultant and educator for the past nine years. WATS.ca is
based in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
 
[Section Four ends].
 
 
++END NOTES.
 
+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.
 
To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.
 
Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .
 
Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.
 
+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.
 
ISSN 1476-6337 .
 
[Issue ends.] 
