++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 143, December 2011.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).

To all our readers - Happy Holidays.

++Issue 143 Contents.

01: New Setback For Global Copyright Exception Treaty
- Proposed EU amendments undermine progress.

02: ‘Fix The Web’ In Struggle For Survival
- No cash for pioneering project to ‘crowdsource’ web help.

03: Free Magnifier Among First Smart Accessibility Awards
- Winning apps unveiled by Vodafone Foundation.

News in Brief: 04: Birthday Standard - BS8878 is One; 05:
Appeal Heard - Canadian government fights web access ruling;
06: Charter Points - major corporates in 10-point accessibility
pledge; 07: Future Web - European project launch.

Section Two, The Inbox – Readers’ Forum. 08: PDF Assistance
– magnification and conversion tips; 09: Auction Battle – can
eBay be sued? 10: Crash Course – web accessibility resource
initially inaccessible, then fixed.

Section Three: Focus - High Street Support.
11: The Guru Is In: The new flagship store for mobile
broadband provider O2 is one of the first attempts by a high
street technology retailer to offer a tailored service to disabled
people, with the help of Abigail Gorman, O2’s first deaf
customer “guru”. Dan Jellinek went to see her.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: New Setback For Global Copyright Exception Treaty.

Moves to create an international treaty to allow accessible
versions of copyrighted works to be shared across borders,
giving people with print disabilities wider access to books,
received a setback this month following “aggressive”
intervention by EU negotiators.

Between 21 November and 2 December, the World Intellectual
Property Organisation (WIPO) held a meeting in Geneva of its
standing committee on copyright and related rights that
negotiators for the World Blind Union (WBU) had hoped
would clear the way for agreement on a copyright treaty.

Hopeful signs had emerged from a June session of the
committee, at which WIPO member states had agreed to merge
several previously separate positions into a single draft
document which became known as “the chair’s text” (see E-
Access Bulletin, July 2011
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=615 ).
The new meeting, however, cast uncertainty on the plans after
the chair, Manuel Guerra Zamarro from Mexico, unexpectedly
invited members to submit further amendments.

Negotiators  for the EU subsequently attempted to reintroduce
clauses that would require rights-holders to formally authorise
and pre-approve organisations to use any exception, a
condition the WBU says would render the whole exercise close
to pointless.

“The EU decided to submit a raft of new and aggressive
amendments which moved us even further away from an
agreed text”, WBU Vice Chair Dan Pescod told E-Access
Bulletin. “They were trying to shoe-horn back in the idea of
authorisation, but this is a no-no – the whole point of this
exception is you will use it when you haven’t been given any
help from rights-holders.”

The new proposed amendments have now been captured in a
working document which Pescod says must be fully discussed
between member states ahead of the next WIPO meeting in
July 2012. “What we are now urging is for the member states
to come together before the next meeting to agree the basis for
a new single text, rather than have a situation where each time
people throw down amendments, go away and don’t consider
them until the next meeting,” he said.

Another vital issue remains, of whether the new agreement
becomes a legally binding treaty – as urged by the WBU – or
softer non-binding guidelines, but Pescod hopes all can be
resolved in July. “I am still optimistic that we can finish this
work next year, ahead of a formal diplomatic conference in
2013.”

If he is right, new ground will be broken: WIPO normally acts
to reinforce protection for rights-holders, whereas this treaty
would reinforce access for users. And it will not have been
easy: formal negotiations on a treaty began two and a half
years ago, in May 2009.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=659 .


+02: ‘Fix The Web’ In Struggle For Survival.

A ground-breaking project to enlist the power of volunteers to
fix web access problems for disabled people is at risk of
closure, after failing to secure government funding.

Fix the Web ( http://www.fixtheweb.net/ ) was launched in
November 2010 to allow disabled internet users to complain
quickly and easily about inaccessible websites using Twitter,
email or online forms. Members of a pool of registered
volunteers then take responsibility for contacting the website
owner on the user’s behalf, following up any response and
feeding back results to the user.

Since launch, the project has recruited almost 700 volunteers
who between them have handled more than 1,000 website
reports and helped to solve problems with several high profile
sites including the Coventry Building Society, various BBC
sites and the online scheduling service Doodle. A major rise in
activity was triggered earlier this year after actor, writer and
technology lover Stephen Fry posted a message of support for
the campaign.

However, despite gaining £50,000 of initial funding from the
Nominet Trust, and receiving publicity support from
organisations including RNIB, the project has failed in attempts
to raise further cash and has now been running for a year
without any external funding.

After it emerged that a recent bid for funding from the
government’s new £10 million Social Action Fund has failed,
Fix The Web founder Gail Bradbrook, director of programmes
at Citizens Online, told E-Access Bulletin the project would
struggle to survive.

“The government asked for charities to innovate, and that’s
what Citizens Online has done – we have raised multi-millions
across all our projects over the years, with not a penny from
central government. So we’re not a cap-in-hand charity, but
equally we can’t run on fresh air.

“Fix The Web still has a huge amount of potential, but it needs
some design work and some funding to oversee the work by
volunteers. Come the New Year, if there isn’t a clear plan for
the project, Citizens Online might have to withdraw because
our brand will be associated with something that isn’t being
looked after properly.”

The project could eventually be sustained by small donations
from multiple sources, but in the short term needs around
£150,000 over the next 18 months to help it reach a sustainable
level, Bradbrook said.

Citizens Online managed to raise pledges of services worth
some £270,000 to use as “in kind” match funding for its recent
Social Action Fund bid. "This shows the level of support and
commitment to the project. The issue is securing money, when
so few funders fit to the aims of this project. Times are really
hard for the voluntary sector, competition is steep," she said.

Ironically, the project has attracted interest from organisations
in other countries including Canada who would like to replicate
it, Bradbrook said. The intention had always been to expand
the work internationally, but this vision is now also in
jeopardy.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=656 .

+03: Free Magnifier Among First Smart Accessibility Awards.

A smartphone app which allows people to magnify text and
adjust fonts and background colours was among the winners of
the inaugural Smart Accessibility Awards for smartphone
applications aimed at supporting disabled and older people
http://developer.vodafone.com/smartaccess2011

Zoom Plus Magnifier, developed by a UK partnership of 232
Studios, Ian Hamilton and Digital Accessibility Centre, offers
functionality for free that has previously largely only been
available in software and camera products costing hundreds of
pounds.

Four international awards of 50,000 Euros each were presented
by the Vodafone Foundation – a charitable arm of mobile
communications provider Vodafone –in partnership with AGE
Platform Europe, a network of organisations working with
older people, and the campaign group European Disability
Forum.

The other winners were Help Talk (
http://www.1000empresas.com ), an app developed in Portugal
allowing people who are unable to speak, such as those
recovering from strokes, to communicate by tapping on icons;
Wheelmap (http://wheelmap.org/en ), an app developed in
Germany which lets users rate the accessibility for wheelchair
users of public places; and BIG Launcher (
http://biglauncher.com/), an alternative customisable Android
home screen for elderly or visually impaired users who often
struggle to use the small keyboards on most devices, developed
in the Czech Republic.

BIG Launcher uses big buttons and large fonts to represent all
the basic functions of a phone such as voice calls, text
messages and cameras. Jan Husak, the app’s co-developer,
says a typical smartphone home screen is not very accessible
for elderly and blind people, being often crowded with all sorts
of icons and widgets.

“On Android, due to its openness, you can choose from
dozens of launchers, but they mostly offer functions which are
only appealing to geeks - even more icons, special graphical
effects and so on.

“BIG Launcher makes using the phone easy, even for users
who are scared of new technologies. It allows its users to use
the phone quickly in any situation, without pulling out their
glasses or getting lost in the menus.”

Wheelmap is an app that builds on top of Google maps,
overlaying information about wheelchair accessibility of any
location such as a restaurant or railway station sourced from
users. In its first month 1,200 users registered for the app,
posting information about 180,000 places.

Andrew Dunnett, director of the Vodafone Group Foundation,
told E-Access Bulletin the type of crowdsourcing used by
Wheelmap held huge promise for disabled people. “The
potential for that to change people's lives is very impressive.
The maps are there, the handsets are available - the key is the
user groups, and how they engage with it.”

In all some 67 applications were received by the awards, with
12 shortlisted before the four prizes were award, Dunnett said.
He confirmed that the foundation would be rerunning the
awards next year.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=654 .

++News in Brief:

+04: Birthday Standard: A call to make the British standard for
developing accessible web sites BS8878 more affordable for
small businesses is among responses from the user community
collated on the first birthday of BS8878 by its lead author,
Jonathan Hassell of Hassell Inclusion. One year after its initial
publication, the standard has been adopted by organisations
across central and local government, the NHS, police, retail,
housing, education and charities, the report says. Although the
precise number of users is kept confidential by the British
Standards Institution, organisations known to have adopted it in
year one include the government services portal Beta.gov;
Royal Mail Group; and University of Southampton. Many of
those interviewed felt that the cost of BS8878 was a constraint
to its uptake, saying the £100 price tag is putting off smaller
organisations. Support activities planned for 2012 include
expansion of the BS8878 community of practice on
meetup.com; and creation of ‘starting point’ templates, case
studies and tools to help organisations create and share the
policy documentation needed to follow the standard. Steps are
also being taken to internationalise the standard:
http://wp.me/p1NwIQ-5y


+05: Appeal Heard: An appeal by the Canadian government
against a 2010 ruling which branded its websites inaccessible to
disabled citizens, and ordered it to remedy the problem, has
now been heard. Last year Donna Jodhan, a blind accessibility
consultant from Canada, successfully sued her government
after she was unable to apply for a public service job online.
The government appeal came to court in November. Jodhan
told E-Access Bulletin the government argued that blind
Canadians did not have a right to equal access to online
information, as people could use other channels or gain help
from sighted staff. The government also claimed the case about
inaccessible websites had not been proven, referring to
previous evidence as mere ‘spot checks’. A ruling is now
expected in the New Year. In September, the Canadian
government published a new standard on web accessibility for
its agencies, though Jodhan said at the time this was an
inadequate response to her case:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=621


+06: Charter Points: A 10-point ‘Accessible Technology
Charter’ aimed at blue-chip corporations and government
departments has been launched by the Business Taskforce on
Accessible Technology, a sub-grouping of the Employers'
Forum on Disability. Pledges contained in the charter include
that “We will appoint an executive level ICT access champion
who will report to the board”; “We will routinely consult with
disabled employees, customers and experts to ensure that we
understand the impact of our technology on talent
management, employee productivity and our diverse customer
base”; “We will allow reasonable personalisation of technology
by our employees and customers”; and “We will give our
relevant ICT people the ‘disability know how’ needed to
deliver effective business processes and reasonable
adjustments for disabled colleagues and customers”. Launch
signatories include BT, BUPA, the Department for Work and
Pensions, Lloyds Banking Group and Sainsbury's:
http://www.btat.org/charter


+07: Future Web: A European project to investigate the
accessibility for disabled and older people of ‘Web 2.0’
applications including mobile web; user-generated content;
social networks and web TV has been launched. The 2.7
million euro “Inclusive Future Internet Web Services” (I2Web)
project is being led by the Fraunhofer Institute for Applied
Information Technology in Germany, with partners including
the UK’s Foundation for Assistive Technology and the
University of York. Initial work has investigated the ways that
disabled and older people currently use web 2.0 services, and
before the project’s completion in April 2013 it will look to
create new tools to help developers produce more accessible
applications:
http://i2web.eu

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: PDF Assistance: There was a big response to last issue’s
request from Fay Rohrlach from South Australia for help with
using the ZoomText magnifier to magnify PDF files without
distortion; and her related query about how to convert PDF
files into Word 2003 files.

Ted Page, director of accessibility consultancy PWS, writes that
if PDF text is appearing fuzzy when using the magnifier, “the
problem here lies with ZoomText rather than the document
author. ZoomText uses a really effective technology called
xFont to smooth out fonts in web pages, but in the current
version (ZoomText 9) it doesn’t work in PDFs.”

However, the next version - ZoomText 10 – is set for imminent
release, Ted writes, and this might extend xFont to PDF files. “I
have emailed the makers of ZoomText, ai squared, to see if
they will let on... I will let you know if I hear anything.”

Meanwhile reader Paul Wood writes in to recommend the
website DocsPal (http://www.docspal.com). “This site can
convert pds to word files that can easily be read, though the old
adage still remains - ‘rubbish in, rubbish out!’

“There is also the 'Copy as text' feature of Acrobat Reader, if
desperate. And other paid for applications that will do optical
character recognition on the pdf, if it’s an image.”

Martin Slack writes in to add that text in a PDf can be
magnified from within the free Adobe Acrobat Reader, without
the use of ZoomText, as long as the file has been created using
text and not images of text.

“Under the View > Zoom menu in Acrobat Reader is an item
called Reflow. It is the last item on its sub-menu, and may also
be activated by the hotkey Control+4, without going into the
menu system at all. When Reflow is activated, the normal
Acrobat Reader magnification hotkey (control+plus) will
magnify the text in such a way that when the line becomes too
long for the screen, it will wrap.

“Naturally this means that you lose the original document
formatting, but on the other hand you can magnify the text
until each word is on its own line.”

Finally Opeolu Akinola, an assistive technology consultant
from Lagos in Nigeria, writes to answer Fay’s second query, on
converting PDF filesinto Word.

“I don't know any direct way of converting PDF directly to
Word but you can convert it to text by going to the file menu
and selecting the Save As Text... option. Then open your Word
and use the Open dialogue to locate and open the file (Word
opens text files). If this does not work, open the text file in
Notepad, select all the text and copy and paste into Word.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09:Auction Battle: In the first of two December contributions
Allan Milne, senior lecturer in software engineering at the
University of Abertay in Dundee, writes in to respond to a
complaint published last month from Martin Jones about the
inaccessibility of the online auction service eBay to blind
people using screenreaders who want to list items for sale.

“The author was firstly asking if anyone had a work-around or
other way of using the web site... why should we be asking this
in today's equality environment?

“It is about time the RNIB, the Equality and Human Rights
Commission or some other national representative organisation
took one of these large sites to court under equality law.

“From the description in the article, the author seems to have a
prima facia case that he cannot use a service provided by
eBay, and that no alternative exists. This is not even a case of
"reasonable adjustment", this sounds like a case of systemic
inaccessibility.

“When is someone going to stand up for us and take one of
these companies to court? I have heard of no such case in the
UK and yet your newsletter reports in the same issue of a US
case against Disney so come on UK organisations, stop being
nice and "co-operative" with companies; take them to court and
make them meet their equality requirements.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: Crash Course: Meanwhile the same Allan Milne – he has
been busy – writes with a complaint of his own about an initial
flaw in a service also mentioned in our last issue – an online
course on web accessibility launched by digital inclusion
charity AbilityNet with the Equality and Human Rights
Commission and BCS (the Chartered Institute for IT).

“On 23 November I went to the supplied web address which
was a simple form with only a few straightforward controls,
using my Dolphin SuperNova screenreader; the first few boxes
were fine with "first name" and so on announced for the form
edit boxes. But then I got down to an edit box with no prompt
announced, followed by a button simply announced as
"button".

“After reading around in virtual focus eventually I found the
last edit box was for comments. I then made a leap of faith that
the final button would be for submitting the form so I went
ahead, entering comments about these accessibility issues and
pressing the button.

“Obviously my assumptions were correct since I received an
email the following day apologising for the lack of labels
accessible to my screenreader and intimating these had been
corrected. So that was good customer service – but the email
also contained a request for me to try these out myself... did
the web development team not have the facility to test this
out?”

Allan did try the site again, this time from his work computer
using a JAWS screen-reader, only to find that while the
comment and button were now correctly announced,
announcements were now missing from the initial edit boxes.

“After further communication to the authors of this issue the
form was then reported as being fully labelled. I have not
verified this.

“My analysis of this is that this was because SuperNova reads
any text to the left of an edit box, while JAWS only reads
correctly attached labels. From this I infer that none of the edit
boxes on the original form had labels or captions associated
with them. When the authors were made aware of the comment
and button issues I can only assume they only amended this
code without any checking of the other edit boxes.

“What hope is there for accessibility when a page that is
promoting a web accessibility course and is authored by the
professional IT society is inaccessible in the first place and
incorrectly updated when this is brought to their attention?”

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Focus
- High Street Support.

+11: The Guru Is In
by Dan Jellinek.

The basement floor of the UK’s new largest outlet for mobile
phone provider O2, which opened this autumn on London’s
Tottenham Court Road, is a chic modern space echoing the
metal and glass technology wonderlands pioneered by Apple.

The “workshop” area with Wi-Fi, sofas and meeting booths,
staffed at the entrance by a “concierge”, feels a long way from
a traditional cramped high street mobile shop.

The clear, large lettering of the shop’s signs are a hint that
something else is different: the store is attempting to integrate
support for disabled customers including deaf people and blind
people into its mainstream service. Staff have received
awareness training from the Royal National Institute of Blind
People (RNIB) and sign language agency Positive Signs.

Asad Hamir, one of the store’s directors, is a qualified optician,
with direct experience of the poor level of service that people
with impaired vision receive on the high street. He has been
quoted as saying he would like to create the sort of
environment to which opticians would feel comfortable
sending their low vision patients, and this is clearly part of the
motivation behind the store’s attempts to offer the best advice
on the benefits that mobile devices can provide for people with
sensory impairment.

It’s not just a moral stand: the directors also see inclusion as a
business opportunity. “If a section of the population is not
being catered for or looked after, it’s definitely a market”, says
Andrew Levey, the store’s marketing manager.

Perhaps the most powerful advocate for the store’s approach is
a member of its staff, Abigail Gorman. Deaf and fluent in BSL,
Gorman is one of the shop’s three O2 “gurus” working through
bookable appointments to offer specialist advice to both
hearing and deaf customers.

One of the only people in the world currently working in an
integrated high street role of this kind, she works with a sign
language interpreter funded from the government’s Access to
Work scheme.

Speaking to E-Access Bulletin with the help of her interpreter
in a bright corner of the “workshop”, having just finished
advising a hearing customer, Gorman said her work
background did not have anything to do with mobiles.  But
thanks to text messaging and internet access they are an
indispensible part of modern life for deaf people as for
everyone else, and she had first-hand experience of the
barriers that can be thrown up on the high street when she went
with her mother – who is also deaf – visited one shop with a
sign language interpreter.

“When we arrived, they said have you called customer
services? If not, then we can’t help”, Gorman says. “What can
you do? Deaf people can’t call customer services.”

So when she saw the job advertised she jumped at the chance,
and with the selection process supported for O2 by Positive
Signs, successfully won through a large number of candidates
to become O2’s first deaf guru.

If a deaf person comes into the store or books an appointment
with her, she says she tries to show there are ways to solve the
inevitable problems and issues that they face in communicating
using mainstream devices.

“It’s about problem sharing, making it normalised.”

The main ways deaf people use mobiles is for text messaging
and video calls, and with more and more phones carrying a
front-facing camera and the rise of apps allowing free
international communication over the web, there are a wide
range of solutions, Gorman says.

For Apple users, one of the most important features for deaf
people is the video utility FaceTime; BlackBerry offers the
BBM instant messaging app; and other multi-platform video,
voice and chat clients include Skype, Tango and ooVoo.

One issue for deaf users is that tariffs are based around voice
calls, which they cannot use, she says: “At the moment, you
have to pay for inclusive minutes. So though deaf people only
benefit from internet and texts, we pay for calls as well.” The
tariff she tends to recommend is 100 mins, 500 free texts and
internet access, though a deaf person would use an internet app
for text in any case.

Another minor irritation for a deaf user is voicemail, Gorman
says. “A message comes up and says you have voicemail – but
you have to call it to delete them. I have 52, because I never
get round get round to asking someone to delete them for me!”

Gorman is the first deaf guru, but she says she hopes the
concept will take off at other shops to allow proper research
and trials to be run into how disabled customers can be served
even better.

Since the store’s opening, use by disabled people has started
slowly but a marketing campaign involving word of mouth,
press campaigns, promotion through charities and disability
networks such as deaf clubs around London is underway to
spread the word and try to prove the concept makes good
business sense.

Plans are in hand to expand advice and services for people
with motor and learning difficulties, and the RNIB plans to
hold events at the workshop looking at the accessibility of
mobiles. The disability community will be hoping that this is
the future of high street retail.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=652

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility discussion on the web for nearly six years.
Celebrating our sixth birthday next month, you’ll find
discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2011 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Editorial advisors: Kevin Carey, Tristan Parker.


ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 143 ends.]
