++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 138, June 2011.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 138 Contents.

01: European Projects To Explore Accessibility of Terminals
- From cashpoints to ticket machines, possibilities have
widened.

02: ‘GoGenie’ Platform To Gather Live Access Information
- Service to use ‘best of social media’ for disability support.

03: Assistance Apps Set For Live Testing This Autumn
- Tools for independent living and blue badge parking.

News in Brief:
04: Colour Maps – accessible colour schemes for digital maps;
05: Assistive Struggle: Funding cuts warning; 06: Dyslexia
Support – public sector guidance.

Section Two, The Inbox – Readers’ Forum:
07: Money Troubles – ongoing search for cheaper access
solutions; 08: London Lapse? Olympic accessibility gap; 09:
Mouse Quest – pressure-sensitive mouth device.

Section Three: Access Champion - Dr Howard Leicester, Kent.
10: Towards An Information-Accessible Village, County – And
World: the story of a deafblind academic who is working with
a national charity to improve health and other information
available to people with special communication needs, from
his home village outwards.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: European Projects To Explore Accessibility of Terminals.

A European working group to develop guidelines and standards
for the accessibility of self-service terminals such as cashpoints
and transport ticket machines has been revived by the
European standards body CEN.

The group – to be convened by user interface consultant Julian
Jones – is a successor to the former user interface working
group WG6 of CEN technical committee TC224 on ‘Personal
identification, electronic signature and cards’, which has lain
dormant for two years.

The revival is needed “because human interfaces have moved
on a lot in last couple of years, with i-pods, i-pads and so on,”
Jones told E-Access Bulletin this week. “There is far more use
of touch-screens and operations which use multiple fingers.
We also want to reflect the use of near-field communication
and the use of tokens on personal handheld devices as well as
contactless cards.”

These developments mean the range of possible user
preferences has become much wider, he said. Preferences
could now include colour combinations, font size, volume of
audio feedback, cursor behaviour and many other factors.

The new group will run a UK open meeting at the end of the
summer to explain the workgroup's objectives to interested
parties and gather input before the membership is nominated
by national standards bodies, Jones said. All those interested in
attending should email him on juliang.jones@btinternet.com .

Meanwhile a European research project into personalisation of
digital self-service terminals, ‘APSIS4all’ (
http://www.apsis4all.eu/ ), has been launched with the aim of
overcoming accessibility barriers faced by people unfamiliar
with ICT, people with disabilities and older people.

The three-year project is being led by the Technosite
Foundation in Spain, with other partners from across Europe
including John Gill Technology and AbilityNet from the UK. It
will focus on two areas – first, how users might be able to
connect a mobile device such as a smartphone to any self-
service terminals so they can carry out interactions on their
own personal device; and second, that of personalisation
according to preferences held either on a smartcard or in the
cloud – work which will overlap with that of the revived CEN
working group.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=607


+02: ‘GoGenie’ Platform To Gather Live Access Information.

An online platform to help disabled and deaf people find
access information online for any location such as a shop,
cinema, cultural event or town centre, based on the
recommendations and comments of others, is set to go into
beta testing next month.

The ‘GoGenie’ pilot project (
http://www.peskypeople.co.uk/go-genie/ ) is initially focused
on the West Midlands. Its development phase was supported
by the Arts Council England Digital Content Development
programme and support for the pilot has come from NESTA’s
Reboot Britain programme.

Alison Smith, director of GoGenie developer Pesky People,
told E-Access Bulletin the project is aimed at “taking the best
of social media and using it for the benefit of everyone in
planning a visit. We are not replacing existing social networks,
we are working with them and enhancing them.”

The result could embrace a mix of technologies including
smartphone apps and tools that can be embedded into partner
websites, with each format being shaped by its disabled and
deaf users, Smith said. “We are not waiting until it is perfect
and launching it - the whole point of crowdsourcing is to be
organic.”

Other partners for the pilot include Telford and Wrekin
Council; the arts marketing agency Audiences Central; and
community theatre and dance organisers Black Country
Touring. “We are also in discussion with a number of cultural
organisations outside of the region,” said Smith. “The pilot has
an emphasis on cultural venues but has potential for wider
application.”

Various members of the wider digital community, such as Will
Perrin of local networking group Talk About Local and Nick
Booth of community social media specialists Podnosh, have
been major supporters of the project from its outset, she said.
“Much of what we are doing has been influenced by attending
hack days, unconferences, and networking - very much the
opposite end of formal conference events and the way
businesses usually operate within the sector.”

This approach brought unexpected success recently when a
partnership forged with the design for all consultancy Enabled
By Design and others to create an android mobile phone app in
less than 24 hours ended up winning an award at Interactivism,
a ‘hackday’ focused on finding accessible solutions for older
people. The day was hosted by consultancy FutureGov and
Google, and the mobile phone app ‘Spotted’ won the Gransnet
award for most useful app (see http://bit.ly/myzsui ).

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=605


+03: Assistance Apps Set For Live Testing This Autumn.

A series of smartphone apps to let disabled people contact
shops, petrol stations and other locations to let them know their
access needs before they arrive is being developed by
Sunderland-based social enterprise DisabledAccess4All (
http://www.access4allapps.com ).

The ‘Customer Assist’ app will let users request assistance both
en route and after arrival. When the user arrives, the shop,
service or petrol station will have received information about
the assistance he or she requires so they can have an attendant
ready to help.

The app will also offer directions to accessible services, and a
separate ‘Parking Space Finder’ app is being developed to work
with local authorities to offer people directions to the nearest
blue badge parking spaces. The parking app is due to go live
for testing in October, with Westminster and Sunderland
councils signed up to take part.

Gary McFarlane, managing director of DisabledAccess4All,
said the apps would be free to use, with various business
models being developed including a possible licensing deal for
service providers, or sponsorship deals which would allow
stronger accessibility branding for some businesses.

“We are currently negotiating to sign up a range of public and
private sector bodies such as banks. If they don’t want to
sponsor, will still carry the information, but sponsors can gain
brand awareness, more prominence.”

The potential of mobile apps such as this to give people with
disabilities more freedom in their everyday lives is enormous,
McFarlane says.

“It breaks down social and physical barriers as well as
attitudinal ones. If someone is relying on a personal assistant to
help them going out shopping, when they implement this, they
may not need that assistance. It means life with a lot less fuss,
with much more independence and choice.”

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=603

++News in Brief:

+04: Colour Maps: Special colour schemes for digital maps that
make them easier to use by people with colour vision
deficiency (commonly known as colour blindness) have been
developed by Britain’s national mapping agency Ordnance
Survey. Following two years’ work by Senior Technical
Product Manager Simon Duquénoy, the colour schemes have
now been released for feedback on the agency’s official blog:
http://bit.ly/jgT5rX

+05: Assistive Struggle: Funding cuts imposed by the UK’s
coalition government “may result in reductions in the provision
of assistive technology and assistive technology information
services at a time when these are even more needed”,
according to a new report from the Assistive Technology (AT)
Alliance, a grouping of four disability charities. Assistive
technologies are defined as all technologies which support
disabled people in living independent lives. Cuts to benefits,
changes to the UK government’s Access to Work scheme, and
the closure of the Independent Living Fund may have a similar
effect, the report finds. “Private and third sector organisations
are likely to become more important, both as a source of
information and supply of AT for self-funders, and through
services provided for or within statutory AT services, such as
the retail model in community equipment services.” ‘Anarchy
or Opportunity? The future for Assistive Technology
information services’ can be downloaded as a PDF from:
http://www.at-alliance.org.uk

+06: Dyslexia Support: Guidance for embedding dyslexia-
friendly practices in public sector bodies has been published
by the Adult Dyslexia Organisation with support from assistive
technology supplier Microlink PC. The guide outlines potential
areas of difficulty and sets a best practice framework that
promotes a consistent approach to addressing dyslexia within
current disability and discrimination law, including the new
Public Sector Equality Duty. ‘Dyslexia – a guide for the civil
service and public sector’ can be obtained from the ADO:
http://www.adult-dyslexia.org

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Money Troubles: David Bates’ opinion piece on the need
for more free or cheap accessibility solutions, from back in our
March issue, continues to spark discussion.

Brian Gaff, who is on the committee of the Kingston upon
Thames Association for the Blind, says his organisation offers
grants for just this sort of problem, “but as so often happens
people either do not know they can apply, or don't want to.

“We have bought [the screenreader] JAWS and [the screen
magnifier] SuperNova for people doing courses, attempting to
find work and so on. I'm sure, or at least I hope we are not
alone in this. In rare cases we have even supplied second hand
machines for these purposes.

“In the current climate we should also remember that [the open
source screenreader] NVDA is out there ( http://www.nvda-
project.org ), and though not as all-singing as JAWS, is very
good for no cost. Of course I must say that this project relies
on donations and sponsored work, so if you do download and
use it, consider a donation to its developers NV Access, or if
you have software that you might like NVDA to support and it
currently does not, discuss with them about how much it would
cost you to remedy this.

“I do agree that many pieces of equipment and software are far
too expensive. I understand that there is now a Braille display
being designed and made in India which is reported to be a lot
cheaper than the current ones, so we all live in hope and also
hope certain companies can see their way to price their
products in line with people’s pockets.”

Meanwhile David Taylor, from Preston in Lancashire, writes in
to stress there are more affordable alternatives out there to the
more expensive systems.

“I must say, in this day and age, it is concerning that people are
not looking beyond Jaws for their screen reading needs. NVDA
uses an almost identical command structure, so there is no
learning involved, and you can get reasonable voices for it via
a number of routes. £800 for a screen reader is just £100 less
than I paid for my computer which included a screen reader
and I could set it up independently too. On top of that, I then
don't need to pay such high upgrade costs or pay extra for
office products since it was a Mac.

“But it is a shame that some blind people just moan, rather than
source alternatives. Voting with their feet would do far more to
reduce the price of access technology. If it's too expensive,
there is a cheaper alternative, try it!”

Finally Fay Rohrlach, a reader from Adelaide in South
Australia, writes in to say that she too would like to see more
things being made available to people with disabilities at a
more affordable price.

“In this current climate, many people who want and need this
sort of equipment can't get it because it is prohibitively
expensive, way beyond the ability of the everyday person to
afford, and especially so for retirees and people who currently
are out of work.

“While the Australian dollar, and the value of it, continues to
be low, we'll always have those who'll never be able to have
the equipment that they want, which is why I've got a computer
on loan to me, long-term, through the Royal Society for the
Blind in Adelaide.

“I wished I never had to, but at least, I've got the certainty that
knowing if something goes wrong, I've only got to phone them
and they take care of the rest from their end. I did have a
computer of my own at one time, but because the people
helping with maintenance lived the opposite side of Adelaide
to me, it didn’t work out. When you're vision impaired and
have to rely on others to take you to places, your independence
is severely limited. It was a real hurt for me when I had to part
with it, as I had it for over 10 years, but that’s life, and we
must get along.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+08: London Lapse? Responding to last issue's article last
issue, 'Screen-Reader Problems With Olympics Ticket Site', the
Australian accessibility academic and consultant Tom
Worthington writes in to say: "Ticketing was one of the issues
with the Sydney Olympics website accessibility case, which I
was an expert witness for:
http://www.w3.org/WAI/bcase/socog-case-study .

“Then [in 2008] the Beijing Olympics Committee flew people
from around the world to Beijing for a week and gave us VIP
treatment, while pumping us for information about their web
site:
http://www.tomw.net.au/2003/bws.html .

“But London have not, so far.”

[Further responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: Mouse Quest: Dorcas Munday, chairperson of the Sequal
Trust, a charity supplying communications equipment to
disabled people ( http://www.thesequaltrust.org.uk ), writes in
to ask if anyone has any information on computer mice that
can be controlled with the mouth.

She writes: “My mouse I use with my computer is 12 years old,
and for five years or more we’ve been searching the net for a
replacement as the company which made my mouse went bust
in 1999. We traced it back to Taiwan. The difficulty being that
I need a mouse with a pad that is pressure-sensitive, and they
are not in fashion any more. I type with a plastic knitting
needle in my mouth. Heat-sensitive is not the answer!

“John, my carer, has revived the pressure-sensitive one until it
is nearly dead! (And it is getting harder to use). With the mouse
I have I can move the cursor around the screen better than
using the number pad and arrows on the keyboard.

“I feel that some of the technology of the past is very useful
when you are disabled. I can’t be the only person in the UK
that uses pressure-sensitive in a pad. I’ve written no end of
letters but no-one ever replies, it is so frustrating! My computer
is vital to me. I’m sure there must be an answer somewhere?”

So far Dorcas has found two possible answers: the Jouse 2, a
joystick-operated USB mouse that is controlled with your
mouth, price $1,499.99 from Independent Living Source (
http://www.iltsource.com ); and the Integramouse, a UK
product with a more adaptable
mouth piece ( http://bit.ly/iYG61F ).

Readers with experience of these devices or with other
suggestions should send them in please to inbox@headstar.com
].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Access Champion
- Dr Howard Leicester, Kent.

+10: Towards An Information-Accessible Village, County –
And World.

Twenty-six years ago Howard Leicester was unexpectedly
diagnosed with genetic deterioration of his eyes and ears,
halfway through taking his first degree. Simple things became
difficult; difficult things impossible.

However, with help and guidance from the charity Sense,
which supports children and adults who are deaf and blind,
Howard has since gained a PhD, run an academic department,
and served on various boards in health and social care. Dr
Leicester is now an independent consultant supporting change
in healthcare planning and delivery.

This year, he had a chance to offer some help in his turn to
Sense when he received a grant from the Vodafone World of
Difference programme which offers people the chance to
donate their time and skills to their chosen charity. Here, he
picks up the story in his own words:

“Deafblind myself and working from home as an academic in
health information systems (health informatics), I'm well on
my way to providing accessible information across Kent from
my native village of Otford.

“My progress has been made partly thanks to Headstar’s events
and bulletins. Last year's e-Access 10 conference introduced
me to PDF accessibility expert Ted Page of PWS Ltd. Now
we're converting advanced academic textbooks from
inaccessible PDFs into usable versions. Many such texts have
been standard on MSc courses I've taught for years. But it's
only now that I've been able to "read" them myself. Moreover,
Kent Library Services will get the products for their online
library portals throughout the county.

“Then E-Access Bulletin issue 129, September 2010
(http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=478) introduced me to
open source accessibility software expert and guiding force
Steve Lee. In particular, the EduApps resource range, specially
collected by the TechDis Regional Support Centre in North and
East Scotland, allows us to generate and convert documents
from and to various output formats. Local documents, like
menus and newsletters, can thus be made more accessible for
Otford residents and visitors.

“IT Can Help (http://www.itcanhelp.org.uk), the network of
volunteers to help older and disabled people with IT run by the
British Computer Society, is also on board. My local ambitions
also stand a better chance because I'm now an Otford Parish
Councillor.

“In recent months (mid March to mid May) I have also been
working with the major deafblind charity Sense, generously
supported by Vodafone's World Of Difference programme
which funds people to work for charities
(http://worldofdifference.vodafone.co.uk).

“I have been working with Sense, fellow academics and other
local and national organisations to help promote the charity,
and help to identify additional needs of deaf-blind patients in
the UK in the modern digital age. Aims include to:

- Develop a standard for including 'special needs' in patient
records;
- Produce models of local populations for predicting 'special
needs' for planning and awareness;
- Promote computers for production and sharing of information
in formats better suited to those with 'special communication
needs';
- Make Otford a more information-accessible village, and
spread these principles across Kent; and
- Gather stories promoting a greater sense of humour on
disability issues.

“Currently, patient 'special needs' are not formally collected,
and data is too limited to estimate national or local needs. Most
leaflets, books, mainstream and mobile websites are still
inaccessible, and there is a general lack of awareness and
understanding of accessibility issues.

"But", continues Howard, "there's progress on some of my
national aims on top of my Otford activities. The ongoing Life
Opportunities Survey (LOS) carried out by ONS/ODI (
http://odi.dwp.gov.uk/disability-statistics-and-research/life-
opportunities-survey.php )
deserves special attention by anyone involved in population
modelling. For the first time, it maps up-to-date numbers on
disability types to various barriers in society - and I've received
generous, personal guidance from the official statisticians.

"Recording patients' accessibility needs is also justified by
LOS. I've produced a method based on self-completion linked
to GP practices. I have received some encouragement for this
work from various academics, Department of Health
Informatics folk and RADAR, but further development and
adoption will depend on receiving further help from other
organisations, and I would be keen to hear from anyone
interested.

“Please follow my activities in Otford and Kent, as well as my
wider activities, via my website:
http://home.btconnect.com/howardleicester

“The home page has a link to the programme with subsequent
links to the specific strands.”

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=601

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility
discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our
sixth birthday next month, you’ll find discussion of
accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2011 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Editorial advisors: Kevin Carey, Tristan Parker.


ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 138 ends.]
