+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 135, March 2011.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email
Newsletter (TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 135 Contents.

01: Report Highlights Research Gaps For Assistive Technology
- Production and commercial issues also impacting on the
sector

02: Council Web Access ‘Should Be Built Into Procurement’
- More user-testing also needed, says annual review.

03: Empowering Potential of Technology Celebrated
- Nominations for accessibility awards now open.

News In Brief: 04: Copyright Controversy - analysts attacks
EU-US blocks to copyright reform; 05: Sunny Content - CSUN
San Diego papers online; 06: Settlement Complaint - Google
books case disappointment.

Section Two: Inbox.
07: Thunder Intact – no cuts for Screenreader.net; 08: More
Sound – Word to audio latest.

Section Three: Opinion - Open Source Software.
08: Priced Out of the Market? Most blind computer users in
employment use the popular, high-end JAWS screen-reader
running on Windows, but the combination can be expensive
for retired or out of work users. The open source community
needs to step in to fill the gap, says David Bates.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Report Highlights Research Gaps For Assistive
Technology.

Lack of awareness of the needs of users with disabilities;
funding problems; user-testing problems and problems with
ensuring use of open standards are all among barriers to
successful transfer of new assistive technologies from the
research laboratory to the real world, a new report finds.

The report was written by consultant Dr John Gill for the
Cardiac project, a European initiative to identify research and
development gaps in the fields of accessible and assistive ICT (
http://www.cardiac-eu.org ).

The project covers two main areas: transferring assistive
devices from the laboratory to wide availability; and
encouraging the introduction of more mainstream products and
services which are usable by people with disabilities.

“In the area of assistive technology for people with disabilities,
many devices have been developed, some of which were
successful, but most have failed to make the transition from
the laboratory to being generally available at affordable
prices”, the report finds.

Problems have included:

- Assistive devices are often required in relatively small
quantities, but modern production techniques require large
quantities to keep prices low;

- Manufacturers often insist on using proprietary protocols,
whereas users would prefer systems based on open standards
to avoid supplier lock-in; and

- Widespread lack of awareness of accessibility issues among
product and service design teams.

Organisations representing people with disabilities seldom join
discussions on research priorities since they lack people with
the skills to understand the potential of new developments to
help people with disabilities, the report finds.

There is also a catch-22 situation regarding commercial risk:
“Companies in the disability area tend to be risk-averse, so
prefer to update an existing product rather than market a truly
innovative concept”, it says. “New concepts may not get
subsidised until such time that they have significant market
penetration, but the market may not exist until a subsidy is
available.

“Therefore, many projects are based on incremental
improvements of available technology and produce only
marginal advantages for end users [whereas] It is ... necessary
to encourage research projects that are based on real
technological innovations and produce significant advantages
for users.”

‘Passing it on - technology transfer for assistive and accessible
information and communications systems’ is available as a pdf
file at:
http://www.cardiac-eu.org/tech_transfer/report.pdf

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=569


+02: Council Web Access ‘Should Be Built Into Procurement’.

Website accessibility should be built into local authority
software and IT systems procurement criteria, the leading
annual review of all UK council websites has found.

More local authorities should also carry out user-testing on
their websites using groups of people with disabilities,
according to Better Connected 2011 ( http://bit.ly/hBOGUw ),
conducted by the public sector Society of IT Management
(Socitm).

A direct accessibility test was carried out for the survey of all
433 UK council websites, based on the World Wide Web
Consortium’s international Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG).

Using these guidelines, just 30 councils (7%) achieved the
basic ‘Level A’ standard, compared with a similar number – 32
– in 2010. As in previous years, no council achieved ‘Level
AA’ – the standard which the previous government encouraged
all councils to reach.

Although the tests continue to use version 1.0 of WCAG (
http://bit.ly/cmbc4g ), the report says it is likely to switch to use
of the newer version 2.0 guidelines for next year’s survey.

As in previous years the Royal National Institute of Blind
People (RNIB), which advises Socitm on accessibility, carried
out its own separate qualitative assessment for the survey on all
sites that passed an automated test. This year, some 241
councils (56%) were rated by RNIB as satisfactory or excellent
using this follow-up assessment of accessibility, compared with
only 187 (43%) in 2010.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=566


+03: Empowering Potential of Technology Celebrated.

A new awards event aims to recognise the ability of computers,
the internet and assistive technology to improve the lives of
people with disabilities and empower vulnerable sections of
society.

Organised by disability and ICT charity AbilityNet (
http://bit.ly/himPdh ) and supported by organisations including
BT, Microsoft and Race Online 2012, the first
Technology4Good awards ( http://bit.ly/gwQUvZ ) are looking
for examples of charities, businesses, government
organisations and individuals that have used digital technology
to improve the work and home lives of others, including
disabled people, the elderly and young children. Two
Accessibility Awards are featured in the seven categories.

Speaking to E-Access Bulletin’s sister publication (E-
Government Bulletin: http://bit.ly/aKaTdz ), Mark Walker of
AbilityNet said that the event has two main aims: “The first is
to share stories about what works. It’s a good chance for
people to share knowledge and experience. Secondly, it’s a
chance to inspire other people.”

At a recent launch event for the awards, a blind member of
AbilityNet gave a demonstration of how his smartphone helped
him to navigate and organise parts of his life on a daily basis.
“I’m sure lots of people have gone away and shared that
story”, said Walker. “The inspiration you get from hearing
about how other people have succeeded is a big part of what
we’re trying to do as well.”

Nominations for all the Technology4Good Awards (whose
judging panel will feature members of AbilityNet, Microsoft,
BT and Martha Lane Fox – the UK’s Digital Champion) are
now open, and entrants may nominate themselves or others
before the 9 May deadline. The results will be announced on 7
June.

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=562


++News in Brief:

+04: Copyright Controversy: Continuing European Union and
US opposition to a proposed law by the World Intellectual
Property Organisation (WIPO), which would allow people with
print disabilities to share copyrighted works across international
boundaries has been labelled as “rigid, insensitive and short-
sighted”, by a former Member of the European Parliament for
Spain. The WIPO proposal has been under discussion for
several years, and had seemed to be edging forwards, though
any clear agreement is still some way off (see E-Access
Bulletin issue 131: http://bit.ly/eNgEDt ). David Hammerstein
made the comments in an outspoken interview with a US
website, in which he said the “EU-US coalition” has not put
forward any solid economic or legal reasons for their
opposition:

http://www.keionline.org/node/1087
Short link: http://bit.ly/hLOHmb


+05: Sunny Content: Papers from the 26th Annual International
Technology & Persons with Disabilities Conference, which
took place last week in San Diego, California, are now
available to be read online. Hosted by the Center on
Disabilities at California State University, Northridge (CSUN –
the acronym by which the conference itself is usually known)
– this year’s event featured presentations on hundreds of topics
including accessibility developments in social media, and how
assistive technology can benefit students with disabilities:

Short link: http://bit.ly/hQhn9p


+06: Settlement Complaint: The US-based National Federation
of the Blind (NFB) has expressed its disappointment at an
American federal judge’s rejection of an agreement between
Google and various publishing and authors’ groups which
would have allowed the company to scan sections of any book
and display extracts online, creating a global digital library. The
NFB had previously expressed its support for the ‘Google
Books Settlement’, claiming it would increase access to a wide
range of books by blind people worldwide:

http://www.nfb.org/NewsBot.asp?MODE=VIEW&ID=778
Short link: http://bit.ly/ieMvSE

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility
discussion on the web for nearly six years. Celebrating our
sixth birthday next month, you’ll find discussion of
accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Thunder Intact: In last week’s inbox, Brian Gaff of
Kingston upon Thames Talking Newspaper wrote in to bemoan
the current government spending cuts, and suggested that two
creators of free or open source screenreader software were
being forced to scale back their operations as a result. However
Roger Wilson-Hinds, director of one of the two firms
mentioned, Screenreader.net, writes in to say: “I was very
surprised to read in the February issue that we are cutting back
our free screenreader development due to lack of cash.

“Actually, the opposite is the truth and there has never been
more demand for free Thunder talking software.

“What we are really doing is moving into the smart phone
sector with a plan to create some useful apps, low cost and
aimed at perhaps a wider audience than merely those who can’t
see. More about all this at a later date, but we are certainly not
cutting back.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+08: More Sound: Steve Griffiths, Digital Accessibility
Development Officer at the Royal National Institute of Blind
People, writes in with a further tip in response to David Bates’
query in our January edition asking advice on free or open
source software to convert Word files to audio formats.

“I wanted to mention the ‘Save as DAISY’ plug-in for Word,
which uses the SAPI 5 voice on your Windows PC”, he says –
SAPI being Microsoft’s ‘Speech Application Programming
Interface’ for speech recognition and voice synthesis in
Windows. A trial version of this plug-in was released last week
that supports Word 2010, Griffiths says:
http://www.daisy.org/project/save-as-daisy-microsoft-word-
add-in .
Short link:
http://bit.ly/bAjxqY .

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Opinion
- Open Source Software.

+09: Priced Out of the Market?
by David Bates.

There is now increasing emphasis on enabling more of the
older and poorer members of the community to use computers
to access information and to communicate with others. I see
the primary need for non-computer-literate older people to be
an inexpensive ‘net book’ with a very simple and easily-
learned interface which will enable them to undertake basic
tasks. But from where can such machines be purchased with
suitable, simple software installed?

Like a new driver, learners are easily put off by technicalities –
they just want to move forward by operating the controls
without learning what goes on under the bonnet. This problem
is especially acute for blind computer users, who have to
control the machine in an unusual way: because they cannot
read the text or see the cursor they must move it around the
screen with the Alt, arrow and Tab keys, and then listen to the
words under the cursor as they are read out with a synthetic
voice. The link they require may be very visible on the screen,
but it may well take the carefully listening user many
keystrokes to locate it.

Many blind users consider themselves tied to Microsoft
programmes and to Freedom Scientific, the company which
makes the popular JAWS screenreader software which is
optimised to read these programmes. These two brand leaders
provide a first-class, premium-priced service for blind people
in paid employment, but their sales policies largely exclude the
needs of the great majority of blind people who are
unemployed or retired.

Since my retirement I have continued to use Microsoft XP,
Office 97, Outlook Express and JAWS, while working for two
charitable organisations. However, I recently had to buy a new
computer which came with Windows 7 and Office 2007
because the older programmes have been withdrawn.

Without the traditional fixed menus, the new programmes are
much more difficult to use with a screenreader. To allow me to
continue my work, Microsoft has therefore forced me to
undertake a considerable and unnecessary learning curve, and
they have also charged me for the privilege of doing this!

However, the crowning insult was that the JAWS upgrade
needed to access these programmes would have cost me £330
($500), which would have meant that the new unnecessary
software programmes would have cost more than the computer
itself. You need to be rich to be blind!

I have decided that if I must go through future learning curves I
will move to open source programmes which are regularly
updated for free and which will remain available. I have
therefore replaced JAWS with NVDA ( http://www.nvda-
project.org/ ), a free screenreader which is easy to learn and
works as well as JAWS. My email client is now Mozilla
Thunderbird, with Firefox replacing Internet Explorer, and I am
now checking a free office programme so that I can get away
from Microsoft Word with its less accessible ribbon menus.

Replacing the Windows operating system will need more care,
but there are several free Linux operating systems out there
whose developers could hopefully produce a simple desktop
interface which will work with their vast assortment of free
programmes, which, surprisingly, also includes a screenreader.

Blind people mostly have incomes well below the average, and
government cuts are likely to reduce these still further, while
also increasing the rate of unemployment among the blind to
above the present level of around 65%.

The open source community should be encouraged to adapt
and supply their software to this low cost market, thereby
providing enormous benefits to both older and disabled
members of the community, a market which appears to be
outside the financial scope of both Microsoft and Freedom
Scientific.

Note: David Bates is a member of the National Federation of
the Blind (NFB) UK Executive ( http://www.nfbuk.org ).

This article is the personal opinion of the writer, and does not
necessarily represent the views of E-Access Bulletin or
Headstar. To respond please email inbox@headstar.com

And you can comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=558

[Section Three ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2011 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Reporter: Tristan Parker.
Editorial advisor: Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 135 ends.]
