++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 142, November 2011.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 142 Contents.

01: Disney Web Access Case Settles Before Trial
- Class action concludes, terms as yet unclear.

02: Smartphone App Launches Accessible Loyalty Cards
- Pilot goes live from Yell directory service.

03: ICT Access Barriers ‘Common Across Europe’
- International survey aims to boost lifelong learning.

News in Brief: 04: Voter Aid - Oregon iPad election pilot; 05:
Live Essentials – web accessibility e-learning course; 06: Phone
Guru – mobile store offers comprehensive assistance.

Section Two, The Inbox – Readers’ Forum: 07: Auctions
Blocked – eBay barriers; 08: File Fight – distortion on
magnified pdf pages.

Section Three: Viewpoint - Accessibility in the real world.
09: Forced Choice: New technologies can liberate – or create
new ways of excluding people. Miro Griffiths on how disabled
people are often forced into using ways of accessing
information they would never choose for themselves.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Disney Web Access Case Settles Before Trial

A US class action against the Walt Disney Company for the
alleged inaccessibility of its websites has reached an out of
court settlement ahead of a trial that had been planned for
January 2012, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

On 29 June, California district judge Dolly Gee gave
permission for three blind women from California and Kansas
to proceed with a class action alleging Disney’s are inaccessible
to screen reader programs, hampering the ability of blind users
to make reservations for the company’s theme parks and
download electronic tickets.

The three women are represented by Andy Dogali at Florida-
based law firm Forizs & Dogali, alongside Los Angeles-based
attorney Eugene Feldman. Dogali has now told E-Access
Bulletin the terms of a settlement have been agreed by the
parties, subject to court approval as required by US law.

“We are presently documenting the settlement, so most of the
precise details remain confidential, although I expect the
process to require no more than another few weeks”, he said.
“The supportive documents will be publicly filed in the very
near future, along with the request for approval.”

The news of a pre-trial settlement may disappoint some
observers, as a January trial would have raised the issue of a
need for greater corporate web accessibility worldwide. Last
month Samantha Fothergill, senior legal policy officer at UK
blindness charity RNIB, said the fact that a company with such
a high profile was being sued was bound to have an effect on
corporate behaviour and lobbying campaigns elsewhere (see E-
Access Bulletin, October 2011
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=633 ).

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=646 .


+02: Smartphone App Launches Accessible Loyalty Cards.

A smartphone app offering digital versions of shop loyalty
cards will open up card schemes to many disabled people for
the first time, its developer has said.

The “mClub” app from print and digital directories company
Yell – which is free to download –allows retailers to offer
deals such as “buy nine cups of coffee, get the 10th free”
without using a physical card. A pilot service – available for
both the Apple iPhone ( http://bit.ly/pDmUyC )
and Android phones
( http://bit.ly/rfB9u6 )
- has been launched in London, Plymouth and Reading, with a
BlackBerry service due to be released in the next few weeks.

Although the service was not originally designed for use by
disabled people Artur Ortega, senior accessibility developer at
Yell, told E-Access Bulletin this month that when he saw the
idea presented internally he immediately saw the potential
benefits for disabled people, and was able to influence the
design process.

“Before, it wasn’t possible for blind people to use loyalty
cards,” Ortega said. “You couldn’t find the right card in your
pocket, and you didn’t know how many stamps were on it. The
app is also useful for someone who has reduced mobility in
their hands and who might have problems getting a card out of
their pocket or wallet.”

Once the app is running, loyalty points are added for each
participating retailer either by swiping it near a terminal on
Android phones using near field communication, or by
scanning a QR code (a square bar code) using the iPhone.
Although there is a beep emitted when the app is successfully
swiped, the lack of near–field communication on an iPhone
was a limitation for blind users unless helped by a shop
assistant, Ortega acknowledged.

Running the app itself was not too hard for blind users, with
iPhones coming pre-installed with VoiceOver text-to-speech
functionality and Android phones able to run similar software
such as the Mobile Accessibility suite from Code Factory, he
said.

This kind of approach, combined with geo-location
technology, is implemented in the new smartphone version of
the company’s home page www.yell.com, which is hugely
liberating for disabled people, Ortega said. “If I need a taxi, I
can find one immediately and then call the taxi using the same
device, I don’t have to copy telephone number – it’s two clicks
away. Or I can order a table in a restaurant – it’s a huge
advantage for blind people or people with reduced mobility.

“Before, you had to call someone and ask them to put you
through to the restaurant. If the line was busy you had to call
again and ask them to look it all up again.”

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=644 .


+03: ICT Access Barriers ‘Common Across Europe’.

The problems encountered in putting ICT accessibility policies
into practice are common across Europe, according to early
findings of a survey of policies in 30 nations (the EU
countries, plus Norway, Iceland and Switzerland), E-Access
Bulletin has learned.

According to research carried out in June for the EU-funded ‘i-
access’ project on access to electronic information and lifelong
learning
(http://www.european-agency.org/agency-projects/i-access ),
problems encountered include creating accessible content;
standards compliance; problems procuring accessible systems;
and a lack of awareness and understanding.

The project is run by the European Agency for Development in
Special Needs Education to raise awareness of the issues
surrounding accessible information provision for lifelong
learning. While some survey respondents said their
organisations provided style guides for creating content, only
about half of these addressed accessibility aspects such as
considering how a screen-reader would cope.

“There are an estimated 80 million people in the EU with
disabilities of varying sorts and to differing degrees, and as the
age profile shifts, so too will the proportion with disabilities”,
John Galloway, a consultant working on dissemination of i-
access findings told E-Access Bulletin this week. “There is no
one solution to the issue of ensuring that any information in an
electronic format, whether a web-page, a text message, an on-
screen document, or an information film, is available to all of
them equally,” Galloway said.

“For each country, we need to find out – what policies do they
have, and how do they put them into practice? What are the
differences and similarities? The lessons learned from across
Europe will be brought together for everyone to share, so this
difficult issue can be addressed.”

Full details of the research and a report of a project conference
co-hosted by the Danish Ministry of Education in Copenhagen
this June are due to be published shortly, with the final project
recommendations expected towards next summer, Galloway
said.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=641 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Voter Aid: Disabled voters in the US state of Oregon are
being helped to cast their ballot by adaptable software carried
on iPads by election workers into locations such as community
centres and nursing homes. Residents in five of the 36 counties
of Oregon cast their votes in a special primary election on
Tuesday to nominate candidates to replace Congressman David
Wu, who resigned following a sex scandal. Voters with
disabilities were able to make their selection on-screen using
screen-readers, adjustable font size and screen colours and
other accessible features. Once the selection was made ballots
were printed out to be delivered to the elections office.
According to media reports if the pilot programme is
successful, the technology will be made available across the
whole state in future elections:
Short link: http://apne.ws/swsnGT
Long link:
http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/U/US_VOTE_BY_IPAD?S
ITE=TNMEM&SECTION=HOME&TEMPLATE=DEFAULT


+05: Live Essentials: The UK's first e-learning course
delivering a national qualification in web accessibility went live
this week. The Web Accessibility Essentials course was
developed by digital inclusion charity AbilityNet with the
Equality and Human Rights Commission and BCS (the
Chartered Institute for IT). For a fee of just under £50, it offers
a minimum standard by which web developers and managers
can demonstrate their basic competence and commitment to
accessibility:
http://www.bcs.org/wae


+06: Phone Guru: High levels of assistance for disabled
customers are being pioneered by the new flagship store for
mobile network operator O2 in central London. The shop
offers in-store advice on the benefits that mobile devices such
as smartphones and their applications, features and functions
can provide for people with sensory impairments. All staff
have also received sight loss and deaf awareness training in
partnership with the Royal National Institute of Blind People
(RNIB) and consultancy Positive Signs, and the shop is also
home to O2 “guru” Abigail who is deaf and fluent in BSL.
Plans are in hand to provide further advice and services for
people with motor and learning difficulties:
Short link: http://bit.ly/vvrCYj
Long link: http://news.o2.co.uk/Press-Releases/O2-store-on-
Tottenham-Court-Road-aims-to-improve-service-for-D-deaf-
people-and-those-living-with-sight-loss-345.aspx

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Auctions Blocked: Reader Martin Jones writes in with an
accessibility complaint about one of the world’s biggest and
most popular internet sites. He says: “I have been wanting to
start selling items on eBay, as others have made a substantial
amount of money, but when I go to list an item, the site is
virtually inaccessible.

“I would have thought, with it being probably the largest
auction site in the world, it would appreciate disabilities and
have made the site accessible, but this does not seem to be the
case.

Can you tell me if there is an accessible programme I can use
to list my items, as I have heard software exists If not, is there
anything which can be done to inform eBay and work with
them to make the site accessible? (I have tried Turbo Lister, but
have the same problems of inaccessibility).

I ask, because when I try contacting them, there is either no
email reply, or the phone line is always engaged. I just thought,
as eBay is now so popular, if someone has a workaround, then
others would be grateful of this: if not, then we should do
something about it, and the more people who are aware, the
more strength we have.

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+08: File Fight: Our regular correspondent Fay Rohrlach from
South Australia writes in with another major target in her sights:
the inaccessibility of many pdf files.

“I'm still fighting to get access to materials of which I want, of
which many are PDFs, and people are not co-operating to
change their ways when it comes to making a move to do so”,
Fay writes.

“We all want to be part of the community. But the accessibility
of this, that, or the other, doesn't permit us to do so. I use
ZoomText, and to bring up anything on the screen that is in
pdf, the letters are distorted if the magnification is brought up
too much.

“I would like to know from anyone as to how can one convert
pdfs into a word file, particularly into Word 2003, please.
Some things I've been sent in a word file 2010, which isn't
accessible. And if there is a way out of it, I'd like to know
about it. This is 2011, nearly 2012. Why are we still carrying
on as if we're still living back in the 1950s?

“I say to any business organisations, and any others concerned,
it could well be one day, that you may need our services, if
you can't read for yourselves. All fully sighted users, please,
change your ways for us, and all other people with disabilities,
or face the compliance rules that may come in the not too
distant future.”

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


+09: Forced Choice
by Miro Griffiths.

The social model of disability holds that it is socially
constructed barriers, rather than the impairments of disabled
people, that limit their opportunities.

Disabled people are disadvantaged by the way society is
organised by non-disabled people. Take any issue or area of
society such as employment, education, housing, transport or
poverty and you will find that disabled people are more
disadvantaged than non-disabled people, and that the
difference cannot be explained or excused by impairment.

The explanation of this deep rooted “structured disadvantage”
lie in the social, physical and attitudinal barriers that society
creates, stopping disabled people from fulfilling their potential
and from achieving the same life chances as non-disabled
people.

ICT is thought to hold great promise for disabled people
because it has the potential to reduce or eliminate many of the
disabling barriers that impair or completely prevent disabled
people from working, learning, shopping, banking, being
entertained, and communicating with others.

But many barriers still remain.

New technologies are constructed, tested and designed for non-
disabled people. They empower people with new abilities, but
also rely heavily on the existing ones. Telephones depend on
the capacity to speak and to listen; computer screens on the
ability to see; satellite navigation systems on the ability to see
and to hear. And so on.

Any new technology brings with it a new power for those who
can use it, and a new disability for those who cannot.

How ICT strategy is developed and implemented can mean for
disadvantaged people the difference between dependency or
autonomous living.

I’ve heard the economic argument that disabled people need to
be “reconceptualised” as a potential market (18% of the
population) and need to trust the market and industry to
address accessibility.

However, I reject this business argument and would rather
assert that the industry needs to embrace the “mind set” of the
social model of disability.

The three critical building blocks of this approach are first,
respect for the human rights of disabled people. For example,
product developers need to employ disabled people and
consult actively with the disability community to ensure that
access is a fundamental part of products.

Second, respect for personal choice. ICT options must not be
imposed on disabled people - often choices for
accommodating impairments are made by a technical
“expert”—someone who knows the technology options and
assesses what they believe is best for the user. If only certain
ICTs are accessible, then disabled people can only choose the
accessible option – it is a forced choice. Forced choices carry
with them the message that non-disabled people warrant a full
range of affordable options, while disabled people only
deserve the few, often specialised and expensive, options that
are made available to them.

And the third building block is development of universal
design and disability-related supports. Often the solutions
developed in accordance with the social model of disability
help not only disabled people but also non-disabled people.

Additionally, there are differences in how disabled and non-
disabled can access and use ICTs that may be beyond the reach
of universal design. These differences create the need for
disability-related supports, as well as information, training, and
local support services in order to become successfully
connected to the digital world. The social model perspective
holds that society should make necessary supports available to
people. In this way, disabled people can both enjoy the
benefits of society and be productive citizens.

In summary, ICT isn’t the powerful agent of change – it is the
strategy that is adopted that will be the change agent.

My personal experience of using ICT during higher education –
I am a post graduate student studying for a masters in disability
at Leeds University – has, on balance, been a positive one.
However, there are a few issues it will be useful to highlight.

Disability Student Allowance (DSA) funding is supposed to
help meet the extra course costs students can face as a direct
result of a disability.

I am a wheelchair user and have a neuromuscular condition
associated with muscle weakness from the neck down. When I
went to have my assessment for DSA I requested several types
of equipment that were appropriate for my type of impairment.

The first item I requested was a computer multi-monitor
application. Typically, a student works surrounded by
numerous text books to read and reference. In my case I am
unable to lift, hold or turn the page of book. So I requested this
piece of kit – three monitors and some software – to flip from
monitor to monitor to access written material or documents.
The total cost was about £700. Instead I was given a non-
mainstream mechanical page turner. It takes up about all the
available desk space, has limited functionality, costs about
£2,500, is totally inappropriate and was a “forced choice” as
described earlier. In the end I had to go out and buy the multi-
monitors myself.

Second item was a laptop – I need a laptop that is
ergonomically suited to my impairment, and requested a model
that I considered functionally appropriate for my access needs.
Again, I was given the “forced choice” and subsequently had
to go out and buy myself a laptop that I was able to access.

Similarly, I wanted a Kindle so I could access reading material
while lying on the bed. I spend 14 hours a day sitting in my
wheelchair and sometimes I would like to study lying down. I
requested the Kindle because it was lighter and ergonomically
suited to my impairment. They gave me the heavier Sony
Reader with the buttons at the top which I couldn’t access.

I went out and bought a Kindle.

This illustrates that it is not the ICT that is the problem but has
more to do with the strategy and the prescriptive approach of
the “gatekeepers” of the service. Thus the “technical expert”
knows what’s best for the user.

Then there was the set book list. All the course material was
electronically accessible, but most of the set books were not
accessible, so I was faced with paying somebody to scan my
purchased books and format them into PDFs. This cost me
three times the price of each book.

The point I want to make is that I am not on “equal basis with
other students”. And many disabled students may well have
given up the course because of issues of affordability.

ICT has to be affordable; available; accessible – and
applicable.

© Copyright Miro Griffiths 2011. Miro Griffiths is a disability
equality consultant. This article is an edited version of a talk
given at this year’s e-Access ’11 conference, hosted by E-
Access Bulletin’s publisher Headstar.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=639 .

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility discussion on the web for nearly six years.
Celebrating our sixth birthday next month, you’ll find
discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2011 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Editorial advisors: Kevin Carey, Tristan Parker.


ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 142 ends.]
