++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 141, October 2011.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 141 Contents.

01: UK Charity Investigates Options To Back Disney Web
Case
- RNIB asks US lawyers if blind people here could join class
action.

02: Digital Inclusion Course Closure ‘Sets Dangerous
Precedent’
- Accessibility business case threatened, academic warns.

03: RNIB To Launch Largest Ever Web Testing Exercise
- All UK local authority sites to be checked against new
criteria.

News in Brief:
04: Official Forum – UK government action plan to be
updated; 05: Cloud Conversion – accessible documents on the
move; 06: Descriptive Guidance – TV and film help.

Section Two, The Inbox – Readers’ Forum:
07: Refreshing Response - Braille unit software; 08: Google
Gaps - new service grumbles.

Section Three: Opinion - Accessible kids’ computer games.
09: Serious Fun: Blind and sight-impaired children have often
been left out of the fun when it comes to computer games,
writes Donna Jodhan. But progress is being made, and things
are looking brighter...

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: UK Charity Investigates Options To Back Disney Web
Case.

The UK’s leading charity supporting blind and partially sighted
people RNIB is investigating whether people in the UK might
be able to join a US class action against the Walt Disney
Company for the alleged inaccessibility of its websites, E-
Access Bulletin has learned.

On 29 June, California district judge Dolly Gee gave
permission for three blind women - two from Southern
California and one from Wichita, Kansas - to proceed with a
class action against Disney alleging the company’s websites
unlawfully include information which is visible to sighted users
but not to screen reader programs, as well as options which are
inaccessible to blind people such as the ability to make
reservations and download electronic tickets.

Web accessibility is just one of five main areas of complaint
being brought in the case, with others including issues in the
theme parks themselves such as a lack of Braille maps. The
plaintiffs are not seeking money damages, simply an injunction
requiring Disney to comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act by making its services accessible.

In her ruling judge Gee rejected as irrelevant arguments by
Disney that the women could have accessed the same services
and information elsewhere, and also rejected arguments that
“there is no accepted accessibility standard”. In dismissing the
latter argument she pointed out that nearly three years ago —
"presumably when website accessibility standards were even
less settled" – a similar action was allowed to proceed against
the US retailer Target for alleged accessibility problems with its
website Target.com (see
http://www.forizs-
dogali.com/pdf/Disney%20Certification%20Order.pdf ).

The three women are represented by Andy Dogali at Florida-
based law firm Forizs & Dogali ( http://www.forizs-dogali.com/
), alongside Los Angeles-based attorney Eugene Feldman (
http://www.californiadisabilitylawfirm.com/ ), with the case set
for trial in Los Angeles in January 2012.

Talking to E-Access Bulletin this week Samantha Fothergill,
senior legal policy officer at RNIB, said she had contacted the
US lawyers handling the case to see if UK citizens could
potentially play any part in adding an international dimension
to the case.

“There is no recourse under UK law for the websites as you
can only sue a website under the Equality Act if the provider is
established in the UK, but because this is an international
tourist attraction people from around the world, including
Britain, could potentially be part of the US case.

“If so we might be able to find clients who had gone to those
resorts, and could make people aware this action is going on –
we would not be encouraging them to join, just passing on the
information.”

UK class actions are rare in the field of disability law,
Fothergill said, not least because all such cases tend to be
settled out of court.

“Class actions are often used here in product liability cases but
disability lawyers don’t often think in that way. We’ve looked
at possibility of class actions but the cases that we have always
get settled, so we’ve never really got to that stage.”

Whatever happens, the fact that a company with such a high
profile worldwide is being sued anywhere is bound to have an
effect on corporate behaviour and lobby campaigns elsewhere,
she said.

“The Target case got more publicity probably among IT
professionals than it necessarily did among blind people, but
this case is more likely to raise the profile of access issues with
those responsible for services and websites around the world,
which can only be a good thing wherever you are.”

Disney is connected with a huge range of public-facing
websites including sites for media partners ESPN and the ABC
television network.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=633


+02: Digital Inclusion Course Closure ‘Sets Dangerous
Precedent’.

The closure by Middlesex University of the first ever European
MSc course in digital inclusion after just one year of operation
sets a “dangerous precedent” for those trying to establish a
business case for accessibility, the academic leading the course
has told E-Access Bulletin.

The unique two-year part-time course was launched by
Middlesex last year. Its curriculum included the social, ethical
and business case for accessibility; regulations and
standardisation; web accessibility; and inclusive user
experience. The course’s overall goal was to improve
participation in the digital society by older and disabled people
as well as people at social disadvantage such as unemployed
people, people on low incomes and those with low literacy.

However after just eight people joined the programme the
university has decided that no more will now be taken on and
the course will close when the current set of students – who
include four public sector workers – have graduated. To make
the course financially sustainable a minimum of 20 students a
year would have been needed.

Gill Whitney, digital inclusion programme leader at Middlesex,
told E-Access Bulletin the lack of demand for the course
signalled a serious problem for the development of accessible
digital services in the UK and beyond.

“Losing the MSc programme due to low student numbers sets a
dangerous precedent - if there is truly no demand, then there is
no business case for offering similar specialist programmes
elsewhere”, Whitney said.

“Designing and developing more accessible systems depends
on having suitable training or education courses in place for
those involved in all aspects of the development process”, she
said.  “The essential element is to convince students of the
value of taking such courses, for example better job
opportunities for both students and disabled people.

“There is now recognition of e-accessibility at a political level,
with the government setting up an e-accessibility forum, but we
also need industry, not-for-profits and government bodies to
demonstrate there is a market demand and that there will be
better jobs for professionals who genuinely understand the
complexities of delivering accessible ICT, systems and
services.”

Whitney said options other than the MSc course could also
play a role in the educational mix, such as better integration of
accessibility issues into mainstream technology courses or
offering short professional development courses or diplomas
that enhance existing skills. But whatever the solutions, action
was needed to ensure student demand, she said.

"There is a strong need for this sort of training to make
accessibility happen.”

One of the course’s students, Big Lottery Fund head of new
media Claudio Concha, said the course had already proven
valuable in his work.

"Inclusive design is pretty much taken for granted in
architecture and product design, yet online content and digital
channels still suffer from a lack of user-centred development
and there is a complete lack of consideration for disabled and
older people,” Concha said.

"This course has helped me understand the gulf that exists
between content producers and organisations on one side and
the reality of customers with differing needs on the other. It
has allowed me to influence design and development projects
with an authority that comes with real experience."

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=631 .


+03: RNIB To Launch Largest Ever Web Testing Exercise.

The RNIB is set to conduct its largest ever manual website
accessibility testing exercise later this year, when it will check
all 433 UK local authority sites against a specially-devised set
of criteria.

The project will form the charity’s latest contribution to the
annual ‘Better Connected’ review of UK council websites
conducted by the public sector Society of IT Management
(Socitm).

In previous years RNIB has run initial automated accessibility
tests on all the sites, only carrying out more detailed manual
assessment on those passing a certain threshold. This year,
however, it will carry out manual checks on all sites based on
attempts to perform three practical tasks on each such as
paying council tax or renewing a library book online. A few
other random top level pages will also be checked.

Marco Ranon, Principal Web Accessibility Consultant at RNIB,
told a recent Socitm seminar in London the tests would not use
a checklist approach against all the principles of the
internationally accepted ‘WCAG [web content accessibility
guidelines] 2.0’. Instead, though the guidelines would be used
as a reference, the performance of tasks would be rated from
0-3 against 14 criteria such as presence of ; unique and
informative page titles; and clear labels on forms, Ranon said.
Some criteria such as the presence of keyboard shortcuts for
tasks would be considered essential “showstoppers”, whose
absence would spell failure of the test as a whole – again with
close reference to WCAG, he said.

“Web accessibility is not about going through every page,
unless you have a very small website,” Ranon told E-Access
Bulletin this week.” You have templates and then try to
educate content people. This is the largest group exercise we do
as a team, and conformance testing with WCAG 2 takes a long
time, so it was not practical.”

‘Better Connected’ reviews are carried out in November and
December, with all results including accessibility test results
due to be published at the end of February 2012.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=629 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Official Forum: The UK government’s ‘e-Accessibility
Forum’, a group of civil servants and advisers tasked with
developing policy to support the improvement of public
websites, IT equipment and online content to suit the needs of
disabled people, is meeting next week to update its action plan.
Monday’s meeting, which will be attended by minister for
culture, communications and creative industries Ed Vaizey,
will examine EU and UK government accessibility standards;
accessible consumer technology and digital equipment; website
services and accessible content:
http://www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/telecommunications_a
nd_online/7782.aspx
Short link: http://bit.ly/j8Z7sc


+05: Cloud Conversion: Trials have been successfully run of a
prototype open source live document translation system that
allows users to transfer files between devices while
simultaneously converting them into more accessible formats
including audio versions and larger text sizes. ‘MyDocStore’
uses cloud computing to allow people to convert files easily,
including to mobile devices such as smartphones. The system’s
developers – assistive technology specialist iansyst,
Southampton University and Raspberry Software - gained trial
funding from the ‘Plain Sailing’ competition run by the
government’s Small Business Research Initiative (SBRI) to
develop technologies to suit specific public sector and
educational needs. The partners are now waiting to hear by the
end of this month if funding for phase two development of a
marketable system will be made available:
http://www.jisctechdis.ac.uk/techdis/news/detail/2011/SBRI_res
ult
Short link: http://bit.ly/kz8Pk7 .

+06: Descriptive Guidance: A guide to describing TV
programmes and films for vision-impaired people has been
published by Canadian non-profit body Media Access Canada.
The first of six chapters that are planned to build into an
‘Accessible content best practices guide for digital
environments’, the descriptive video production and
presentation guide is ‘open source’, and will be updated
regularly based on comments received. Further chapters will
cover issues including closed captioning techniques:
http://www.mediac.ca/proj-ACBPG.asp .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Refreshing Response: In last issue’s Inbox Tas wrote in to
ask if anyone knew of a free or cheap screenreader programme
that will work alongside the Tieman CombiBraille 98
refreshable Braille unit.

In response Ari from South Africa wrote: “For Tas, tell her to
try the Cobra Braille screen reader from Baum (
http://www.baum.de ), it works with many old displays. You
can try it as a demo first to see if it’s OK for you. I think there
in the UK it is sold by Pamtrad
( http://www.pamtrad.co.uk ).

Tas received this advice gratefully and has emailed Baum, and
promised to update us on the results. In thanking Ari she said:
“It’s amazing that someone on the other side of the world can
help me like this. I am really grateful to you for taking the time
to pass on your help.”

[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+08: Google Gaps: Our regular correspondent Brian Gaff, who
is on the committee of the Kingston upon Thames Association
for the Blind, writes in to grumble about accessibility issues
relating to Google services.

“Judging by the comments in the Google group ‘accessible’ it
seems that Google have painted themselves into a corner with
their new online apps like Google Plus and Google Docs,” Gaff
says. “Half of them won't work with most basic screenreaders
and so they add ChromeVox to their Chrome browser. Hardly
what blind folk would want, to have to alter access technology
just to use Google’s stuff.

“The failing here surely is that the folk writing the code are not
aware enough of what works and what does not for blind
access. It’s sad that in this age we are still saying that the
writers of code are not educated in making sites that just work
out of the box, so to speak.

“Surely in this age when people want more users to generate
more revenue, it ought to be a no-brainer to get as many folk as
possible to be able to use web sites, software and online
systems, but it seems it’s not. We are invisible I suspect.

“I block Google’s ads now as they persist in trying to sell me
Venetian blinds... grin.”

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Opinion
- Accessible kids’ computer games.

+09: Serious Fun
by Donna Jodhan.


Each time I hear those commercials on TV of kids having fun
with learning games, I ask myself how much of this is or can
be available to blind and sight-impaired children. The truth is
that, as modern technology develops, we find that more and
more blind children are struggling to keep up when it comes to
being able to enjoy the excitement and fun.  But with more and
more toy manufacturers coming out with nifty ways for kids to
learn to read, write, do maths and spell, blind and sight-
impaired kids need to be given ways to enjoy all of this as well.

It’s true that some major strides have been made in making
mainstream games – whether educational or otherwise – more
available and accessible to blind and sight-impaired kids but
there is a great deal more that needs to be done.  Blind and
sight-impaired kids need to be able to access more mainstream
technology. In short, they need to have equal access to
whatever game or learning tool is out there for the mainstream
kid.

Some strides have been made in the area of ball games; a
beeping baseball or hockey puck, a beeping ball for lawn
tennis, and look how Goalball has been developed for blind
people. So all is not lost.

So progress continues to be made.

For example Spoonbill Software, run by “happily retired
computer programmer” Ian Humphreys in Albany, Western
Australia, now offers some 18 free computer games for
sighted, vision-impaired and blind players. The Spoonbill’s
newest accessible game, BG Codebreaker, substitutes all the
letters of the alphabet with numbers and then invites you to
decode words. You can browse all 18 game descriptions here:
http://www.spoonbillsoftware.com.au/blindgamers.htm

Other useful sites include AudioGames.net, a portal for games
based entirely on sound:
http://www.audiogames.net

Accessible chess puzzles, hosted by Mario Lang:
http://delysid.org/chess/epd.cgi

And One Switch, a gaming resource for people with physical
and learning disabilities:
http://www.oneswitch.org.uk

So can we allow ourselves to dream and hope that the blind
children of tomorrow will have a better opportunity to move a
bit closer to the mainstream world of games and toys?  That
they will have more to choose from and that they will be able
to enjoy them that much more?  Will they have a greater
chance to participate in mainstream fun or will they continue to
lag behind and need substitute games and toys?

I am sure that as time goes on, more and more toys and games
manufacturers will develop products that are more accessible.
Products that will benefit all kids. This may even be closer to
becoming a reality than many would think, though we can lend
a hand by lobbying these companies to move in the right
direction.

NOTE: Donna Jodhan is an accessibility consultant who is
involved in an ongoing legal battle with the Canadian
government over accessibility of its websites (see E-Access
Bulletin, September issue).
And Donna’s blog is at:
http://www.donnajodhan.blogspot.com/

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=626

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility discussion on the web for nearly six years.
Celebrating our sixth birthday next month, you’ll find
discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2011 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Editorial advisors: Kevin Carey, Tristan Parker.


ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 141 ends.]
