++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
Access To Technology For All, Regardless Of Ability
- ISSUE 140, September 2011.

A Headstar Publication.
http://www.headstar.com/eab/ .

Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end).


++Issue 140 Contents.

01: Site Owners Ignore Requests to Fix The Web
- No positive response from three in five contacted.

02: Canadian Accessibility Guidelines ‘Not Fast Enough’
- Says consultant locked in ongoing legal battle.

03: Charities Push For Binding Treaty On Global Book Access
- Campaigners slam EU support for non-binding code.

News in Brief:
04: Betagov Standard – government portal follows code of
practice; 05: Web Discovery – international survey of
computer needs; 06: Able Parliament – disability support group
for politicians.

Section Two, The Inbox – Readers’ Forum:
07: Refreshment Needed – software sought to work with old
Braille unit.

Section Three: Opinion - Internet Campaigning.
08: Time To Make Our Voices Heard: If the disabled market is
worth £80bn a year, why are mainstream technology
manufacturers still treating disabled people as second-class
citizens? Let’s use social media to force a change, says Alison
Smith.

[Contents ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Site Owners Ignore Requests to Fix The Web.

Some 60% of website owners contacted about accessibility
problems by the national ‘FixTheWeb’ project either ignore the
contact or “duck the issue”, according to the project’s director.
And just 10% take action immediately to fix the problem.

FixTheWeb ( http://www.fixtheweb.net/ ) is a national
programme allowing any disabled person encountering
accessibility  problems online to inform a group of volunteers
– now morethan 600-strong – who will pursue the issue with
the website owner on their behalf. Volunteers can be contacted
using email, Twitter, a web  form or a special browser toolbar,
allowing anyone to report any web accessibility issue quickly
and easily. The project is led by the digital inclusion charity
Citizens Online with funding from Nominet Trust.

So far about 700 websites have been reported through the
service, Gail Bradbrook, the project’s manager, told the second
annual Web Accessibility London Unconference at City
University last week ( http://a11yldn.org.uk/ ). However of
these, only about 50 have been fixed by their owners.

In all, 40% of contacts made by volunteers received no
response at all, said Bradbrook: “Somebody probably chose to
ignore it, unless we got spam filtered.” In a further 20% of
cases the volunteers were “fobbed off, with people kind of
acknowledging issue but ducking it”, she said, or in some cases
showing they had not previously registered the issue of
accessibility at all.

Some 30% of people contacted agree they have an accessibility
problem and say they can’t deal with it now, but it does matter
to them and they will try and address it in future, she said. And
in 10% of cases the problem is fixed right away, with half of
these needing help to do so.

However even in cases where no response at all is received, the
project may be achieving something by raising awareness that
accessibility problems  exist and that people are noticing them,
Bradbrook said.

One of the project’s high points so far came when actor, writer
and technology lover Stephen Fry posted a message of support
for the campaign, with the resulting PR boost producing its
biggest rise in activity to date, she said.

FixTheWeb is currently focused on the UK but is now looking
for partners to go global, Bradbrook said. Within Europe, it is
already in the process of setting up a key partnership with
eAccess+ (http://www.eaccessplus.eu/), a European network of
e-accessibility experts.

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=624 .


+02: Canadian Government Access Guidelines ‘Not Fast
Enough’.

A blind woman who is battling the Canadian government in the
courts over the inaccessibility of its websites has said a new
initiative to improve the sites does not move fast enough.

Donna Jodhan, a blind accessibility consultant, sued the
Canadian government last year over the inaccessibility of its
websites after she was unable to apply for a government job
online. In December 2010 a judge ruled in favour of Jodhan
but the government is appealing against the ruling, claiming that
the judge exceeded his jurisdiction in finding a “system-wide
failure” of government through its websites, when it was only
Jodhan who was proved to be directly affected (see our
January issue http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=532 ).

The Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat (TBS) has now
published a new standard on web accessibility for government
agencies ( http://bit.ly/pYv4Jo ). Under a phased programme,
agencies have until the end of the year to submit a report on
their current state of accessibility. Inaccessible web sites will
then have to be made accessible in stages, with home pages
and pages providing “the most important information and
services” ordered to comply by the end of February 2012; and
all remaining pages by 31 July, 2013. All new web pages
published after 1 October, 2011 must immediately conform,
although exceptions will be allowed to all deadlines in
circumstances where “exclusion for a period of time can be
demonstrably justified.”

A government-wide compliance report will be released by the
board at the end of February 2012, with updates published
annually thereafter. If government bodies do not comply a
range of sanctions are possible including suspension of public
sector staff from web duties.

Jodhan told E-Access Bulletin she thought the release of the
new guidelines was linked to her legal action, but that it was an
inadequate response. “It does not go fast enough; their time
frame is too long,” she said. “I think that a year would be more
reasonable.”

She also questioned the government’s commitment to
accessibility in appealing the 2010 decision in her case. “If the
government feels that this is going to address the issues raised
in my court case, then why is it spending all this money to
appeal the decision that was handed down on in 2010?” she
said.

Dates have now been set for the appeal of 15 and 16
November.

Jodhan suffered a minor disappointment in August when two
of three disability organisations which had sought intervention
status in her case had their requests turned down by the court.

These were the national blindness charity CNIB, the Canadian
Council of Disabilities (CCD) and the Alliance for Equality of
Blind Canadians (AEBC) of which Jodhan herself was elected
president in May of this year. In an August ruling, the AEBC
was the only one granted intervener status, allowing it to speak
in court about the wider implications of any decision taken.

Responding to this decision, Jodhan said: “These three
organisations felt that they had a vital and vested interest in this
case to represent other concerns on a broader level. We were
all quite surprised that the other two were not granted similar
status.” The two unsuccessful applicants would have offered a
broader perspective to her case, Jodhan said, “but they can still
help in other ways.”

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=621 .


+03: Charities Push For Binding Treaty On Global Book
Access.

UK and European blindness charities are stepping up the
pressure on politicians ahead of a decisive meeting of the
World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) to consider
rules allowing accessible versions of copyrighted works to be
shared across borders, giving people with print disabilities
wider access to books.

Negotiations at the WIPO General Assembly later this month,
followed by a meeting of the organisation’s standing committee
on copyright and related rights (SCCR) in November, are likely
to settle a long-standing debate on whether access rights to
copyright works should be the subject of a binding
international treaty of merely a voluntary ‘recommendation’.

EU negotiators have been lobbying against full treaty status
under strong pressure from rightsholders in some member
states. However the European Blind Union has now submitted
a petition to the European Parliament's Petitions Committee to
be heard on 3 October saying the EU’s position contravenes its
own charter.

“By opposing such a treaty, the EU Commission and Member
States are clearly failing to recognise and respect the right of
persons with disabilities to benefit from measures designed to
ensure their independence, social and occupational integration
and participation in the life of the community”, the petition
says. “In doing so the commission is failing to live up to its
commitments to article 26 of the EU Charter of Fundamental
Rights on the integration of persons with disabilities.”

Meanwhile the Royal National Institute of Blind People (RNIB)
has responded to a UK government consultation on the
copyright negotiations saying the EU’s position in calling for a
voluntary code or ‘soft law’ runs counter to the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which
“makes explicit disabled people’s right to accessible
information... and that 'laws protecting IP rights should not
place unreasonable or discriminatory barriers in the way of
access to cultural materials’.”

“No rights holder organisation would accept the idea that
voluntary codes of good behaviour signed by consumer
organisations could be so effective in ensuring an acceptable
level of rights holder protection that they would remove the
need for binding copyright law. We likewise reject the
argument that voluntary cooperation and licensing can replace
a legally binding right of access to works by print disabled
people.”

The RNIB rejected moves by some EU negotiators to suggest a
‘two-step’ approach, with a joint recommendation to be
followed by returning to discussions on a treaty at a later date
but with no guarantee any treaty would emerge.

“RNIB would like to underline that a two-step approach simply
postpones – possibly for many years- a full and long overdue
solution to a problem first identified back in the 1980s... it
would put in place a second class solution for disabled people,
in contrast with the first class solution –treaties - offered to
rights holders to protect their interests.”

The November meeting is also likely to settle the final wording
of the text of the proposed recommendation or treaty,
including the relationship between the new copyright exception
law and contract law, following progress in June towards a
single draft document involving compromise on both sides (see
July issue coverage http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=615 ).

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=619 .


++News in Brief:

+04: Betagov Standard: The forthcoming ‘beta’ or trial version
of the new digital platform for UK government services – due
to launch in January 2012 – is to be one of the first major
websites to be designed in compliance with the British Standard
BS8878 Web Accessibility Code of Practice, the project’s
accessibility consultant Léonie Watson has revealed.
Accordingly the site’s developers will be documenting all
accessibility-related decisions taken throughout the lifecycle of
the beta site, as well as carrying out extensive user testing and
consulting with various disability organisations, Watson told E-
Access Bulletin’s sister publication E-Government Bulletin.
The prototype ‘Alphagov’ developed earlier this year was the
subject of much controversy over its lack of support for
accessibility:
http://www.headstar.com/egblive/?p=994


+05: Web Discovery: An online survey of how blind, visually
impaired and deaf-blind people use computers and assistive
technology to access information has been launched by the
American Council of the Blind and Google. The survey –
which is open to international web users, though the alternative
telephone version is a US number – aims to discover how
people discover, choose and adopt assistive technologies; how
they make decisions about whether to switch or upgrade tools;
and their support needs, “as a first step to developing effective
new ways of accessing information in the cloud”:
http://www.acb.org/googlesurvey


+06: Able Parliament: A new support for disabled Members of
Parliament, members of the House of Lords and Parliamentary
staff was launched this month by the Speaker of the House of
Commons John Bercow MP and celebrated former
paralympian Baroness Grey-Thompson. ‘ParliAble’ is open to
both those who consider themselves to have a disability and
those who have an interest in supporting disabled people.
Steering committee members are Paul Maynard MP, Dame
Anne Begg MP, Stephen Lloyd MP, Baroness Wilkins,
Baroness Thomas of Winchester, Baroness Campbell of
Surbiton, and John Borley, director of general facilities at the
House of Commons. For more information email:
parliable@parliament.uk

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Refreshment Needed: Our reader Tas from London who
is blind and also hearing impaired writes in to ask: “I am
wondering if any of readers may be able to help me.

“I was given a Tieman CombiBraille 98 - 45 cell unit a few
years ago. It worked for a while but then the software with it
failed. I had it working with the JAWS 98 screenreader OK, but
that no longer works. And the JAWS company said, basically
just go out and buy a new unit and new JAWS, which was no
help at all. I cannot afford a new refreshable Braille unit...  it is
way, way beyond my means.

“So now the Combi has been sitting in a cupboard and I am
really struggling with my PC and magnifier. I am using
windows 7 on a laptop now.

“Does anyone know of a free or nearly free programme that
would work with the Combi 98? I just cannot afford anything
new at all. I don't work because of my disability and am getting
on a bit now too...

“Someone suggested NVDA and I tried that but again it won't
work with the Combi. If anyone has any suggestions I would
be really grateful.”

[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Adept Transcription
- Alternative Formats At Affordable Prices.

When you want alternative formats for disabled colleagues,
customers and staff, call Adept.

Formats we produce include audio, audio description, Braille,
BSL, Easy Read, e-docs for websites, large print, Makaton,
Moon and sub-titles, at prices from a penny a word.

Whether handling a newsletter, training DVD, equality scheme,
public service leaflet, contract or consultation, we provide:
- One-stop shop for all formats
- Products quality-checked by users
- Corporate presentation including your house style
- Fast turnaround of one document or thousands
- Multi-format discounts
- Accessible packaging

Contact us at:
Tel: 0208 133 5418 (precede with 18001 for typetalk)
Email transcription@adept-uk.org

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Opinion
- Internet Campaigning.

+08: Time To Make Our Voices Heard
by Alison Smith.

Our accessibility campaign and consultancy group Pesky
People started life as a blog developed in response to Digital
Britain, the UK government’s strategy for boosting our digital
economy which did not include people with disabilities in any
way. We responded by campaigning against this digital
discrimination and evolved from a blog into a website and now
a company.

We are just one example of how disabled and deaf people now
have the opportunity to be a part of the web - to use it, to come
up with ideas that work for them and others and to make them
happen. Go Genie (http://www.gogenie.org) is our response to
the need for easy to find access information that crowdsources
information from disabled people themselves, but is useful for
everybody.

It isn’t so much about ‘helping’ disabled people: we are not just
passive recipients of the wonderful technologies and assisted
technologies available - although many organisations and
companies see us like that and would prefer us to remain like
that.

I am horrified that companies developing digital products for
disabled people seem to only see us in monetary terms and fail
to develop useful products that are funky and stylish and
affordable. Why not?

The cost of some of these products are prohibitive so many
disabled people can’t buy them (I’m told it is the low number
of units made that make them expensive – though I’m not
totally convinced by that).

Assistive technology can be expensive and out the reach of
many people's budgets. Is it fair that while a smartphone can
cost £500, to purchase screenreader software for one computer
costs around £1,000? Or that eye-tracking technology assisted
products can cost up to £8,000, while in the high street a
Kinect box using motion technology can cost £199.99?

It's no wonder people with severely restricted mobility are
using head wands and wooden visual alphabetical keyboards.
Where are the affordable assisted technology products?

Mainstream companies are ignoring us as a market and failing
to make their products accessible. Have you ever tried to find a
mobile that works with your digital hearing aids or visual
impairment?  It took me six months to find a new mobile that
met my needs. The information is not out there and companies
are ignoring us.

The UK Disability Market is worth around £80 billion a year
and last year the older market was worth £100 billion or more.
So what is their excuse? By 2033, 23% of the population will
be aged 65+ so maybe the economics will drive the innovation
and companies will rise to the challenge.

I see our future as being a bigger part of digital technology,
making our mark and actively engaging with the technologies
on offer.

I’m a newcomer to this sector but with 20 years’ experience of
working in the cultural sector as an artistic programmer and
project manager particularly in disability arts I’ve discovered
that if I can work to see our ideas into action then others can
too. The concepts have potential for disabled people as artists,
entrepreneurs, and consumers.

We can turn the old order on its head so that disabled and deaf
people take the lead and initiative to use the internet and the
technologies available for our benefit.

It is empowering that social media connects us up. It gives us a
voice and the opportunity to say what we need and want and
come together easily to achieve that.

The opposite side of the coin is that real life barriers are also
virtual barriers, unless we challenge them and do something to
change them ourselves. We need to grab that opportunity.

Alison Smith is founder of Pesky People:
http://www.peskypeople.co.uk/

- Comment on this story now, on EAB Live:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/?p=617 .

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Accessify Forum
- Six Years of Accessibility Discussion.

Accessify Forum has been the number one destination for
accessibility discussion on the web for nearly six years.
Celebrating our sixth birthday next month, you’ll find
discussion of accessibility at all levels, from beginner to guru.

The site has recently been redesigned and the forum system
improved. This is still ongoing and you can join in the
discussions.

So whether you’re looking to learn more about accessibility,
want to help others and improve on your own knowledge, or
just to browse the archives, come and join us at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com/

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other
email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please
encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any
time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2011 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including
this copyright notice are included, and as long as people are
always encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email.
Please also inform the editor when you are reproducing our
content. Sections of the bulletin may be quoted as long as they
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor: Dan Jellinek.
Editorial advisors: Kevin Carey, Tristan Parker.


ISSN 1476-6337.

[Issue 140 ends.]
