* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid to those using screen readers, all headings 
begin with an asterisk and end with a full stop. Please let us know if there 
is anything else we could do to make navigation of the bulletin easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 28, APRIL 2002.

* CONTENTS:

News:
- Disability Act code of practice delayed.
- New technology unveiled at Cambridge conference.
- EU procurement laws get disability clause.
- Education technology agency launches online advice service.
- Accessible web rises up the EU agenda.

News in brief: Braille word; Specialist internet providers; Access to law; 
United colours.

Section two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' forum.

Section three: policy
- 'E-Europe: laying siege to the city walls. The EU has placed access 
issues at the heart of its e-Europe initiative, but could the early 
recommendations of this project end up being ignored? UK 
representative Kevin Carey has the inside story.

Section four: reader response
- Braille music: Setting the standard. Last month's feature on the 
development of hi-tech alternatives to Braille music prompts a strong 
reader response.

Section five: focus
- Speech technology: any time, any place, any device.  Speech 
technology is widely touted as the interface of the future, and not just for 
blind people. Judith Markowitz assesses the state of the art.


[Contents ends.]


* SECTION ONE - NEWS.


* DISABILITY ACT TIMETABLE SLIPS.

A delay in the publication of guidance relating to the education 
provisions of the Disability Discrimination Act could cause problems 
with the act's implementation, a leading charity has warned.

The government was expected to publish codes of practice explaining the 
obligations of schools and colleges under the DDA in May but a delay in 
their presentation to Parliament has meant these may now not appear 
until July or even later.

Once implemented, the act will make it unlawful for schools, colleges 
and universities to reject applications from students purely on the 
grounds of their disabilities.

According to Skill (http://www.skill.org.uk/about), an education and 
employment charity that helped draft the code of practice, the delay may 
cause problems as schools, colleges and universities must review and 
amend each curriculum and their staff training, admissions and 
disciplinary procedures by September 2002. 

Skill policy director Sophie Corlett said: “This legislation should have a 
major impact. In the past, colleges could be quite up-front about rejecting 
applications because of disabilities. It also means that education 
providers have a duty to make reasonable adjustments to provide support 
and access to disabled people.”

The whole of Great Britain will be subject to the September 2002 
deadline, with Northern Ireland expected to follow shortly after. By April 
2003, the act further requires educational establishments to offer 
“auxiliary services” such as sign language interpreters, and by 2005 to 
complete physical adjustments such as installing lifts.

To help fund the changes, the Department for Education and Skills has 
made 70 million pounds available to schools in England, the second 
chunk of a total budget of 220 million under the Schools Access 
Initiative that will be spent on upgrading facilities for the disabled by 
2004. 

However, Caroline Ellis, parliamentary officer at the RNIB, said more 
sustained funding is necessary to make a substantial impact on disabled 
access to education. "RNIB strongly welcomes the increases but they 
will not touch on many of the key barriers faced by pupils with sight 
loss. Specific and sustained funding is needed from the government to 
ensure every school and local education authority can provide accessible 
information to children and to ensure each authority has enough mobility 
officers to train children to get around independently. The situation at the 
moment is dire on both counts, leaving parents, children and their 
teachers and support staff at their wits' end.”


* CWUAAT’S UP DOC.

A range of futuristic technologies for people with visual impairment 
were unveiled last month at ‘CWUAAT’, the first international 
Cambridge Workshop on Universal Access and Assistive Technology.

Research into three-dimensional virtual reality training environments for 
the visually impaired was presented by Dimitrios Tzovaras of the 
Informatics and Telematics Institute in Greece. The work, which forms 
part of an EU project entitled ENORASI, used a ‘CyberGrasp’ haptic 
glove to create the impression of solid objects which could be felt, 
picked up, held and examined.

Trials undertaken by 26 blind volunteers included the identification of 
three-dimensional virtual geometric objects on a table-top which could 
be used in mathematics teaching; the physical representation of moving 
graphs such as sinusoidal waves; virtual maps with tactile features; a 
selection of virtual spheres of different simulated materials that could be 
lifted and squeezed; and some entertainment games including target 
shooting.

Another highly practical trial involved the simulation of a cane that could 
be used to tap virtual objects to simulate situations such as crossing the 
road at traffic lights. The users felt sensations of holding a cane and also 
realistic vibrations and sounds as virtual objects were tapped. For more 
information see:
http://www.iti.gr/db.php/en/projects/ENORASI.html

Other technologies on display included a system to allow blind or 
visually impaired people to create and read graphs and charts such as bar 
graphs or pie charts developed by Professor Stephen Brewster of the 
University of Glasgow. Using a ‘haptic mouse’ which creates a physical 
sensation when a user moves over a line on the chart, Brewster said the 
system might for the first time allow blind people to gain a proper 
overview of a diagram or chart (see http://www.multivis.org).

Joanne Coy of the privatised postal service Consignia, which sponsored 
the workshop, told delegates that new Disability Discrimination Act and 
an ageing population meant that large employers had to take access 
technologies seriously if they are to recruit from the best available talent 
and retain their existing staff. arger Because of their scale and profile, 
organisations like Consignia would be expected to lead in this field, she 
said.

CWUAAT is scheduled to be reconvened every two years. Its web site is 
at:
http://rehab-www.eng.cam.ac.uk/cwuaat
And to find out how to buy a copy of the proceedings email Simeon 
Keates at Cambridge University on lsk12@eng.cam.ac.uk


* EU TENDER LAW TO EMBRACE ACCESSIBILITY.

Accessibility issues could be allowed to overrule economic factors in the 
allocation of public sector technology contracts across Europe under new 
laws being considered by the European Parliament.

On Monday the Parliament is to hold a public hearing to discuss 
amendments to EU law that would apply to all public contracts within its 
borders. Although it would not oblige organisations to take accessibility 
issues into account, those that do could be protected from challenges 
mounted under existing competition laws.

Until now, EU laws on tendering have made promoting cross-border 
trade their main priority, and have encouraged competition for tenders by 
focusing on economic factors alone.

According to Labour MEP Richard Howitt, the move represents a 
significant change in direction for European law. “It’s a very important 
piece of legislation. It’s about Parliament revisiting social and 
environmental clauses that were abandoned years ago in favour of 
promoting competition, and recognising corporate and social 
responsibility as legitimate goals in the public sector,” he said. However, 
more progress is needed to bring Europe up to speed with the US, Howitt 
said.

Public procurement transactions are thought to account for over 11 per 
cent of EU nations' combined economic output, but also have a major 
impact on construction and public works, energy, telecommunications 
and heavy industry.

Readers can participate participate in the public hearing at:
http://www.edf-feph.org/en/policy/empl/empl_pol.htm


* ASK BECTA.

BECTA, the UK government agency in charge of information 
technology in education, is this month running an online advice service 
on using technology to improve access to learning.

The panel has already been asked about the education of visually 
impaired people, with the question: "Where can I find good curriculum 
activities on the web for blind children?"

Panel member John Liddle from the technology access charity 
AbilityNet advised the consideration of consideration of the resources 
developed by the University of Birmingham's Visual Impairment Centre 
for Teaching And Research unit, VICTAR:
http://www.education.bham.ac.uk/research/victar

To visit the BECTA forum and seek advice see:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/becta


* EU COUNCIL CALLS FOR ACCESSIBLE WEB.

The Council of the European Union, the body representing EU 
governments, last month issued a resolution that aims to encourage its 
members to improve the accessibility of public sector sites.

The resolution supports a communication issued late last year by the 
European Commission that encourages European institutions and 
governments to improve web accessibility (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 
22, October 2001).

The resolution "stresses" the need to increase efforts to improve the 
accessibility of the web and "encourages" member states and the 
commission to require their web sites to conform to the World Wide 
Web Consortium's Web Accessibility guidelines.

It is non-binding, but the council said it will be monitoring progress and 
has asked member states and the commission to submit a progress report 
in the first half of 2004.

To see the full text of the resolution see:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/EU

NOTE: Last month the European Commission opened its first 
documentation facility for visually impaired people, the VIP Office at the 
Albert Borschette Conference Centre in Brussels. The centre offers 
access for up to three people at a time to all commission documentation 
currently available on the internet via technologies such as text-to-speech 
and Braille keyboards. Other such centres could follow in other EU 
institutions, and the commission hopes the initiative will help to increase 
the number of visually impaired staff working for it.


*NEWS IN BRIEF.

* BRAILLE WORD: A comprehensive new Braille tutorial for Word 
2000 keyboard users has been published by Hotkey Systems. The paper 
version of the book costs 63 pounds plus postage from the US while a 
floppy disk costs 16 pounds. A table of contents can be found at the 
'download center' at: http://www.wyfiwyg.com

* ISP INPUT: E-Access Bulletin is planning to run a feature assessing 
internet service providers which provide services tailored to the needs of 
blind people. We would like to hear of readers' experiences of such 
services, positive or negative. Please contact Phil Cain on 
phil@headstar.com or call 01273 231 291

* ACCESS TO LAW: Information about accessible website law is 
available at TechDis, a government-funded online service on 
technologies improving disabled access to higher education. It has been 
compiled by Martin Sloan of Glasgow University:
http://www.techdis.ac.uk/resources/msloan01.html

* RESEARCH BULLETIN: The National Library for the Blind Research 
Bulletin is a free, twice-yearly email newsletter covering national and 
international research projects in the visual impairment, library and 
information technology worlds. Anyone interested in receiving the next 
edition should contact Sarah Bundock on sarah.bundock@nlbuk.org or 
call 0161 3552089 – and back copies can be found at:
http://www.nlbuk.org/common/bulletin.html


[Section one ends.]


* SPONSORED NOTICE: PATHFINDER GOLD DATABASE.

Pathfinder Gold from Enable Enterprises is a database of over 11,000 
contacts in the disability and lifestyle fields with email and web 
addresses where available, categorised in over 700 topics. The CD 
database covers all major disability organisations, national and 
international sporting bodies, educational institutions and more.

The CD will have three sections: companies, organisations and media, in 
a number of formats including CSV, Access and Outlook XP. The 
database is priced at 100 pounds for a single copy or 150 pounds for a 
copy and an updated copy in October.

Orders can be paid for by cheque or paypal. Contact 
pathfinder@enableenterprises.com

[Sponsored notice ends].


* SECTION TWO - 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com


* EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE: In our last issue Juan Carlos Benito, 
a special education teacher in Santander, Spain, wrote in to seek advice 
on helping his 18-year old pupil Bruno to use a computer. Bruno has 
cerebral palsy and cannot control the movement of his limbs.

In response Anna Dresner wrote in to say: “At the ‘Closing the Gap’ 
conference in 1998, someone demonstrated a piece of hardware and a 
related computer program that allowed a person to control a computer 
via brain waves. They could move a mouse, type, play games and so on. 
It seemed to be easy to learn, and very effective.”

Following an enquiry Sarah Anderson, administrative assistant at 
Closing the Gap, said the technology remembered here was the 
Cyberlink from Brain Actuated Technologies, whose web site is:
http://www.brainfingers.com
To find more about this product readers can also search by company or 
product name at the conference’s online resource directory:
http://www.closingthegap.com/rd

Meanwhile Deanne Ferris of Augusta, Western Australia, suggests 
another possible solution - the Eyegaze Communication System by LC 
Technologies:
http://www.eyegaze.com/indexdis.htm

She writes: “I have no experience with this system, but the website 
appears to give all the relevant details (including the price in US dollars - 
youch) and mentions that the system has already been used in Spain.”


* ON THE MAP:  Last month, Kate Page of English Nature asked for 
advice on the creation of accessible maps on the web, for example maps 
that display information about sites of special scientific interest.

In response Dave Pawson from the RNIB wrote in to say: “I've been 
playing with a combination of scalable vector graphics 
(http://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG) and Microsoft’s Speech Application 
Programming Interface (SAPI), to provide a keyboard based navigation 
of maps with voice output. It is very early days, but this looks like a very 
good example case.”

Other readers expressing an interest in this area include David Bailey of 
the British Geological Survey (http://www.bgs.ac.uk), which he says is 
interested in making its maps accessible; and David Hawgood of 
GENUKI, a virtual library of genealogy links for UK and Ireland, whose 
website provides and advises on maps which can be printed and raised:
http://www.genuki.org.uk/b


* UNITED COLOURS:  Further to our feature on technologies to help 
blind people choose clothes (E-Access Bulletin, issue 17, May 2001), 
Anthony Barnett of Chris Kay International writes with more 
information on 'Lextra' Braille. Using heat applied transfers and welded 
graphics, the system carries information on colours and clothing care 
fused into clothing fibres. The company says it could also act as an anti-
counterfeiting device, and has support from Benetton. For more 
information email:
abarnett@chriskay.com

[Section two ends.]


* SECTION THREE: POLICY
- 'E-EUROPE'.

* LAYING SIEGE TO THE CITY WALLS.
by Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

In the first half of 2000, during the Portuguese presidency of the EU, the 
'e-Europe' initiative was launched. At its core was the idea that Europe 
needed to get its act together or it would be left totally behind by digital 
developments in the US. But although it already lagged behind in the use 
of desktop and laptop computers, the EU was heartened at the time by 
Europe's lead in the mobile phone and digital television fields.

At a ministerial conference in April 2000 there was a strand dedicated to 
discussing the disability and access chapter of the draft e-Europe 
Declaration. Of the 40 or so people present only three were disabled: 
Judy Brewer, a wheelchair user from the US representing the Web 
Accessibility Initiative (WAI); Rodolfo Cattani, an observer from the 
European Disability Forum (EDF) who is totally blind; and myself, also 
totally blind and representing the RNIB.

Most participants in the strand were well-meaning but out of touch. They 
were too concerned with access to education and employment which are 
already an integral part of other EU and member states' initiatives, too 
interested in milestones and benchmarks and the paraphernalia of 
international diplomacy, and too little interested in access to shopping, 
banking, dating, broadcasting, health and financial information.

On each of the two days the rapporteur - as the EU official responsible 
for recording proceedings is known - read his notes which I challenged 
for totally failing to reflect the substance of the discussions and for 
possibly being written in advance of the discussions. The notes were 
abstract, my calls were for concrete measures. However I made a fatal 
tactical error by calling for the currently trendy option of integrating 
disability into all aspects of the declaration (a cross grained approach) 
rather than keeping it as a separate chapter. In the next three months all 
the significant proposals in the original chapter on disability were traded 
away in their cross-grained manifestation. The only way you can get 
anything if you are disadvantaged is to camp outside the city but near its 
walls in order to cause trouble and get food parcels; once inside you 
become invisible.
 
The e-Europe Declaration was duly approved by the EU Council of 
Ministers in June 2000 and, as a result, a 'high level' committee was set 
up to handle the Economic and Social Dimension of the Information 
Society (ESDIS). For historical reasons this committee was linked to 
member states' departments of employment or social welfare under 
which disability usually falls. As far as I am aware, nobody from a 
department of trade, industry, technology or communications was 
nominated.

ESDIS subsequently established an 'expert group' in e-accessibility. Each 
member state could nominate two experts, one from government and one 
from the voluntary or academic sectors. But, because the EU would only 
pay for one per country, member governments concentrated on sending a 
government official, leaving the the voluntary sector to contribute a 
member if it paid for itself. This is a pity because, again, the officials 
almost all come from welfare and employment backgrounds whereas the 
expert group is necessarily supposed to contain technology experts.

I first heard about this group a year ago and it took me a while to find out 
who represented the UK. I then discovered that he wasn't all that keen on 
the assignment. So I proposed myself to the Department for Work and 
Pensions (http://www.dwp.gov.uk) as his replacement; and at the 
beginning of this year it agreed. So I am the first disabled voting member 
of the group, although the redoubtable Mr Cattani of the EDF is an 
observer.

The group is currently reviewing legislation on disability and e-Europe 
and is likely to come out soon with some recommendations on 
procurement. I doubt they will be as rigorous as those under 'Section 508' 
in the US but we must do our best once the proposals are published to 
tighten them up.

The group's second current work area is a review of technical standards 
which has been farmed out to a some consultants who will report back 
shortly. This is an interesting area of work but its impact on real life will 
be severely limited unless there is some political weight behind any 
emerging consensus. The problem is that accessibility legislation in 
general terms is being formed against a background of industrial 
deregulation. The outcome for access rights is as inevitable as that for a 
bicycle in the path of a juggernaut. Nonetheless, it may well be that 
formulating standards will be the new way forward.
 
Which leads, naturally, to the Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI - 
http://www.w3.org/WAI). This has been a very successful instance of 
promoting a principle through a set of standards. The EU has now 
accepted WAI's Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) at the 
level of basic ('A') compliance. There are four major issues to watch 
here:

- First, minimum compliance at level 'A' is rapidly becoming maximum 
compliance; the basics are being seen as a ceiling and not a floor.

- Secondly, there are massive areas where the WAI guidelines need 
improvement, particularly in the cognitive sector and with respect to 
multimedia - we are a long way from establishing that all multimedia 
should be 'multimodal', meaning that users can use a variety of different 
inputs.

- Thirdly, member states seem unable to resist a spot of unilateral 
improvement. So, instead of participating in WAI to formulate WCAG 
2.0, each state is trying to make little improvements. There is a danger of 
fragmentation which will, in turn, lead to problems with assessment and 
compliance tools which will be naturally designed to assess WAI 
compliance, not nationally legislated compliance.

- Fourthly, in spite of WAI already having a process to design and 
approve assessment tools for compliance, some countries want to 
develop their own, again leading to fragmentation. In this area, however, 
the problems would be particularly severe because impartiality, 
transparency and comparability are the backbone of any system of 
compliance.

The final current strand of work for the expert group concerns the 
establishment of an EU network of 'centres of excellence' to formulate a 
design for all curriculum. This may sound rather dull but it is potentially 
the most important development after the WAI work because one of the 
big problems of accessible design is that many designers don't have a 
clue what to do other than whip out all the graphics.

So a lot of good work is going on, but we are still a long way away from 
contemplating universal standards of service in banking, broadcasting, 
dating, shopping, health and financial information. Nevertheless, it is 
vital that we do eventually develop such standards.

[Section three ends.]


* SECTION FOUR: READER RESPONSE
- BRAILLE MUSIC.

* SETTING THE STANDARD.

Last issue’s article on music notation from the blind (E-Access Bulletin, 
issue 27, March 2002) received a large response from readers, many of 
whom felt the article had been unfairly hard on the Braille music system. 
We reproduce edited versions of two of these responses below, and 
would like to thank their authors – readers with further views are 
welcome to email us on inbox@headstar.com

Lisette Wesseling, a soprano and Braille music teacher, writes: “As a 
fluent Braille music reader who performs and teaches professionally, I 
take issue with the general tone of the piece. A great deal of 
standardisation of Braille music notation was achieved worldwide 
throughout the entire 20th century.

“Music Braille has always had a great deal of standardisation, though 
there is always more that could be done. I have borrowed and purchased 
countless scores from overseas libraries, some produced early last 
century, and all have been completely accessible to me. To say that 
Braille music has had no standardisation until the 1997 manual was 
released is inaccurate.

“Blind musicians have used Braille music for professional and amateur 
reasons for 150 years. It has served us well all this time, and certainly 
does not need to be replaced. If anybody suggested changing the system 
of print music notation they would be told to stop interfering where they 
were not wanted.

“The beauty of Braille music is that the performer can have independent 
access to the score, making his or her own interpretative decisions as any 
sighted performer would.

“Using this system, we can sight sing in a sighted choir! No gadget 
would let us do that silently, or without headphones. Any machine which 
gives audio descriptions of a piece could not be used in an orchestral or 
choir rehearsal, since the "reader" is not actually accessing the score, but 
a second-hand version of it.

“Braille music scores can be, and often are, laid out so that information 
can be skimmed over, in headings, on lines of their own. Bar numbers 
can be judicially printed on a separate line above the bar to which they 
refer, so the fingers can easily locate them and any other such headings 
using good tactile navigation techniques. A purely pictorial method does 
not work, as we discovered 150 years ago. But there is a lot of spatially 
presented information in Braille music that can help the reader read in 
greater or lesser detail as desired.

“Braille music is linear because that's how Braille works, but a fluent 
reader can skim across a line and learn to recognise a phrase mark, word 
sign, or a staccato mark extremely quickly. He or she can then ignore 
that information if not required in that particular reading. Of course a 
Braille reader can't get an overview of a whole score as a sighted person 
can, and we all would embrace technology which would assist in this. 
But for detailed study the Braille music system works very well indeed.

“In my experience, it is also true that children take to it extremely 
quickly. Even my seven-year-old student loves using it, and doesn't find 
it confusing or unduly difficult.

“The lack of Braille music currently used or taught is due to a lack of 
available scores quickly enough, and a lack of teachers willing and able 
to teach it in a fun and relevant way. Funding should be directed at 
greater production (using Braille music translation software and manual 
transcription as appropriate), and in the area of producing good UK 
based teaching material.

Of course signs need to be added to Braille music to cope with 21st 
century compositional techniques (graphical scores and so on), as well as 
world musics, and I have no objection to research being conducted in 
technology which can give extra information about a score which Braille 
music does not, but let it be done in a spirit of adding to what we already 
have, not replacing it because people without proper knowledge think it's 
best for us.”

Meanwhile Bettye Krolick, Compiler of The New International Manual 
of Braille Music Notation, writes: “John Henry, the outstanding blind 
musician and scholar, asked me to share the following information about 
what is going on in North America with new developments regarding 
Braille music.

“Educators are realising that with a quick knowledge of how to help 
blind students read music, they can open the advantages of music 
participation to all youngsters by using the software that is now 
available. Vocal, orchestral, and band parts as well as keyboard music 
can be prepared by musicians who do not necessarily know Braille. 
Goodfeel from Dancing Dots and Toccata from Optek Systems are two 
translation programs that accurately produce Braille scores containing 
exactly what is in the print scores.

“I recently returned from a conference of transcribers and educators in 
the state of California where I showed a group of 26 sighted vision 
teachers how easy it is to read Braille music. As soon as I reassured them 
that there are only seven different notes in Braille music - the same seven 
notes that appear in each octave of a piano - they relaxed, and within the 
90 minute workshop all of them were reading beginning music with great 
confidence. In order to read more music signs, each teacher now has a 
small dictionary of all the signs needed up through the first 12 grades of 
school with very few exceptions, and their blind students will have the 
same information in Braille.

“The complete Dictionary of Braille Music Signs that I wrote contains 
information about the international work that began with the Cologne 
Congress of 1888. It states details about the remarkable number of 
Braille music signs (notes, note values, octave signs, rests, accidentals, 
key and time signatures and so on) that have never changed since 1888, 
thanks to a series of international meetings and agreements.

“As far as tactile reading is concerned; it will die quickly - as soon as 
someone gives the tester a few pages of cello music that is commonly 
written with up to four different clef signs per page.”

[Section four ends.]


* SECTION FIVE: FOCUS
- SPEECH TECHNOLOGY.

* ANY TIME, ANY PLACE, ANY DEVICE.
by Judith Markowitz

If you ask people in speech processing where the industry is headed, 
many of them will say they envision a time in the near future when 
speech will be a mainstream tool for communication and information 
access anytime, anywhere and using any device. I would add that this 
implies communication could be in any language.

Although opinions vary widely on how long it will take to achieve these 
dramatic goals, in the past couple of years speech technology has made 
significant progress. All major speech and voice-processing technologies 
have made huge gains in speed, accuracy, size and flexibility.

The most visible advances towards the anytime, anywhere, any device 
goal have been made in automatic speech recognition (ASR). ASR 
systems are now being successfully used in environments as diverse as 
handheld devices, automobiles, public telephone networks and 
warehouses. These implementations can range from a dozen words to a 
million or more proper names. They can require command-and-control, 
dictation and increasingly complex dialogue structures.

Overall, the technology is far more accurate than it used to be, although 
noise and deviations from standard speech patterns (for example when 
someone has a cold, a speech impediment, or is shouting) still cause 
performance degradation. Support of multiple languages is increasing 
and a few systems incorporate language identification technology so that 
the choice of language can be done unobtrusively.

Distributed technology, which does some processing on the device and 
some on the network, represents a significant advance towards the 
anytime, anywhere, any device goal. Using distributed processing, a 
person can use device-embedded ASR technology to navigate a menu on 
a hand-held computer device or dial a telephone number by voice. That 
person can also use the same device to access network-based ASR, such 
as dictation tools, directory assistance and other more complex, larger-
vocabulary systems.

Text-to-speech synthesis technology (TTS) is another area that has seen 
major developments recently. Some of the new breed of ‘concatenated’ 
TTS systems, which create words by linking together or concatenating 
pre-recorded spoken sounds, are almost indistinguishable from human 
voices. These systems have made it possible to deliver news, alerts and 
frequently changing customised information to people automatically - 
anytime, anywhere and to any device. Today, these high-quality systems 
are too large to embed in handheld devices, but the trend is to use 
compression and other techniques to reduce the size of good TTS.

Voice-based biometrics, whose most widespread implementation is 
speaker authentication to allow access to be blocked by unauthorised 
users, supports anytime, anywhere, any device access to data and 
services. Today, access is primarily via telephones, but there is a strong 
trend to reduce voice models to sizes suitable for embedded 
deployments.

As with ASR, noise remains an issue, particularly when a person enrolls 
on one type of telephone but authenticates on another, for example a 
mobile phone. Companies have begun to deploy model noise conditions 
on different kinds of telephone channels. Another important trend is the 
use of "background models" and other techniques that model the voices 
of potential imposters.

Access control is also being enhanced through the verification of 
knowledge. In some instances the person is asked to supply specific 
pieces of information, (for example favorite colour, father's middle 
name) and both the content and the voice speaking it are authenticated. 
Other systems perform knowledge authentication unobtrusively, as part 
of a general dialogue that the system or an agent is having with the user.

Another key area of development to track in the field of speech 
technology is one that is often overlooked, but an essential component - 
that of microphones. Good audio input is an unobtrusive asset to both 
ASR and voice-based biometrics. Poor audio input can lead to higher 
error rates and the failure of an application.

Significant advances in microphone technology include far-field 
technology and miniaturisation. Far-field technology can process speech 
at distances of a foot or more, and makes wearing a headset optional and 
supports spoken input to handheld devices and embedded systems, for 
example in cars.

Tools that identify and extract noise from a signal are now provided by 
microphone manufacturers, ASR technology developers and by 
companies for which noise cancellation is important. The results can be 
excellent, especially when the person is using a close-talking 
microphone. It is also improving at a rapid pace for far-field input. There 
is, for example, a great deal of work being done in telematics on 
modeling noise associated with different driving speeds. Unfortunately, 
with dynamic noise cancellation, too many cooks spoil the broth. When a 
noise-canceling microphone is used with noise-canceling ASR, the signal 
is actually degraded.

Unexpected variability in noise, for example from passing vehicles, 
represent a persistent challenge. Variable noise and extremely high noise 
levels are, however, also challenges for human listeners. Addressing 
those problems is likely to require intelligence about dialogue content 
and may need to exploit image processing such as lip reading for 
disambiguation.

NOTE: Part two of this article in our next issue will cover topics 
including voice-driven web technologies. This article first appeared in 
the US-based magazine ‘Speech technology’ 
(http://www.speechtek.com/st.mag/index.shtml). Dr. Judith Markowitz 
(http://www.jmarkowitz.com) is associate editor of the magazine and a 
leading independent analyst of speech technology and voice biometrics.

[Section five ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You 
can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. 
Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this 
copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-
accessibility.com is also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News Editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
