* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment.
Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute of the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid for screen readers, all headings begin with 
an asterisk and end with a full stop. All items are also now numbered 
in the contents and throughout the issue, with numbers appearing 
immediately after the asterisks. Please let us know if there is anything 
else we can do to make navigation easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 32, AUGUST 2002.

* CONTENTS:

Section one: News.

1: Design network completes Euro action plan
- national design centres join forces.

2: US Congress backs accessible e-voting
- overwhelming vote for national standards.

3: Open VISTA for digital television
- research begins on voice-activated programme guides.

4: National library database revealed
- national catalogue overcomes delays.

5: Design insights for digital libraries
- good site navigation is key.

News in brief: 6: E-book finder – new online archive; 7: Workers co-
operative – skills database launches; 8: Construction guidelines – 
accessible web book.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
- 9: Discussion forum; 10: Learning languages; 11: Fireworks display.

12: Section three: Analysis – Communications Bill.
- More hot air than wind of change? Derek Parkinson finds only half-
hearted commitments to accessibility in the government's sweeping 
new technology regulation bill.

13: Section four: Net history – 'phreaking'.
- Telephone engaged: many of the early 'telephone hackers' were 
blind. Phil Cain retraces the steps of one networking pioneer now 
working on the right side of the law.

14: Section five: Writing competition - first prize.
We present 'OASIS', the winning entry of our creative writing 
competition, by Neill McBride.

[Contents ends.]


* SECTION ONE: NEWS.

*1: DESIGN NETWORK COMPLETES EURO ACTION PLAN.

Web accessibility standards in Europe have received a boost with the 
launch by the European Commission of the European Secretariat for 
the Design for All e-Accessibility Network (ESDeaN). The network 
aims to establish national centres of excellence; provide a forum for 
sharing best practices between designers and engineers; and raise 
public awareness of accessibility issues.

ESDeaN has around 90 organizations in the network and is actively 
seeking new applicants. Details can be found at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/esdean
So far, national contact centres have been established in 15 countries 
throughout Europe:
http://www.e-accessibility.org/national_contact_centres.html

Thee creation of ESDeaN marks the fifth and final stage in the-
accessiblity programme seet out in the commission's 2002 'eEurope' 
social action plan. The other key components were closer co-
operation between member states, adoption of Web Accessibility 
Initiative guidelines for public websites, publication of accessibility 
standards and a review of legislation. 

Progress with eEurope accessibility initiatives are due to be discussed 
at a conference on 9 September, hosted by the European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute in Copenhagen:
http://www.etsi.org/frameset/home.htm?/cce


*2: US CONGRESS BACKS ACCESSIBLE E-VOTING.

The US Congress is set to adopt new national standards for accessible 
voting, following an overwhelming vote in the House of 
Representatives to accept proposals from the Senate based on the 
premise that new voting systems provide “a practical and effective 
means for voters with physical disabilities to cast a secret ballot”.

As well as stating that new voting systems should be in place by 
2006, the legislation earmarks federal funds to help states upgrade 
their systems and improve registration procedures. 

The Congress decision – by some 410 votes to two - concludes efforts 
by the US legislature to harmonise two separate strands of law drafted 
to prevent a repeat of the electoral controversy that surrounded the 
2000 presidential election. For a comparison of the Senate and 
Representatives proposals see:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/congress

The Senate proposals were supported by the Consortium for Citizens 
with Disabilities (http://www.c-c-d.org), a national coalition which 
includes the American Association of People with Disabilities and the 
American Council of the Blind.


*3: OPEN VISTA FOR DIGITAL TELEVISION.

A new voice-based application that could replace text-based 
electronic programme guides for digital TV, allowing visually 
impaired users to speak questions and commands to their TVs and 
receive voice responses, is being developed by UK researchers.

Virtual Interface for a Set-Top Agent (VISTA) is currently being 
tested by a mixed sighted and visually impaired test groups at the 
University of London and Victoria University, Manchester. 
According to Jonathan Freeman of Goldsmiths College London, the 
18-month project aims to make the platform-independent system 
responsive to natural, conversational requests such as “What time is 
the news on?” rather than a specialised vocabulary of commands.

Although Freeman says there is no guarantee that VISTA will go into 
commercial production, he thinks the underlying technology could be 
highly adaptable, and thus act as a valuable first step towards voice-
enabled interactive TV.


The 18-month project, which is led by the Independent Television 
Commission (ITC), also includes BSkyB, City University, Sensory, 
Televirtual, the University of East Anglia, the Victoria University of 
Manchester, and is part-funded by the Department of Trade and 
Industry and the Economic and Social Research Council (see 
http://fastlink.headstar.com/itc).

Although the ITC is due to be absorbed imminently into the new 
communications industry 'super-regulator' Ofcom (see also section 
three, this issue), this will not affect progress with VISTA, Freeman 
says.


*4: NATIONAL LIBRARY DATABASE REVEALED.

The long-delayed ‘Reveal’ project to create a national database of 
information resources in accessible formats looks set to finally begin 
development on 1 October, following agreement on terms by the 
project’s main partners, the National Library for the Blind (NLB) and 
the RNIB.

The project, which was originally due to launch in April 2001, will 
log hundreds of thousands of resources, with details of who holds 
them and how they can be obtained. It will also hold information on 
whether a particular work is in production or planed for future 
production, to help avoid duplication of work by different agencies in 
making information accessible.

The intention is to provide visually impaired people with the same 
access to library and other information sources nationwide as 
mainstream library readers enjoy, with the ability to identify, locate 
and request any title.

The system will be based on the Geac software used by the NLB 
(http://www.library.geac.com), with work planned to take six months, 
to be followed by a formal launch in spring 2003. The project’s costs 
of around 200,000 pounds are being met by Resource, the 
government agency for libraries (http://www.resource.gov.uk); the 
British Library (http://www.bl.uk); The John Ellerman Foundation 
(http://www.ncvo-vol.org.uk/jef.html); and private sponsor Lloyds 
TSB.

For further background on Reveal see:
http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/bib-man/projects/stv/reveal.htm


*5: DESIGN INSIGHTS FOR DIGITAL LIBRARIES.

Designers of accessible web sites for libraries, search engines and 
directories place too much emphasis on transcribing text or rendering 
images as text and not enough on the layout of navigation links, 
according to a study by Manchester Metropolitan University.

The research, which compared how 40 sighted and visually impaired 
subjects accessed a series of test sites, found that even where 
information had been rendered as text, design features like frames 
made finding information difficult. 

According to researcher Jenny Craven, accessibility could be 
improved in many cases by simple alterations. “A site can be made 
easier to navigate for people using screen readers by placing 
navigation bars along the top of a page or alphabetically, rather than 
down the sides, or scattered through a page as they often are,” she 
said.

Full findings of the two-year Non-Visual Access project (NoVA - 
http://www.mmu.ac.uk/h-ss/cerlim/projects/nova.htm) are due to be 
published shortly. The project is government-funded as part of a 
national project to move public libraries online 
(http://www.resource.gov.uk/). 


*NEWS IN BRIEF.

*6: E-BOOK FINDER: A free web-based search tool to help find 
details of book titles published in e-book format went live this week. 
The archive is said to contain information on tens of thousands of e-
books issued by over 400 publishers:
http://www.ebooklocator.com

*7: WORKERS CO-OPERATIVE: Furniture makers, horticultural 
services and even a web designer are among early registrations on a 
new online searchable database of people with disabilities seeking 
employment, created by the Wales-based Disabled Workers Co-
operative. The aim is to help local businesses find people with the 
skills they need:
http://www.disabledworkers.org.uk

*8: CONSTRUCTION GUIDELINES: A group of US experts has 
published a book, 'Constructing accessible web sites', which as well 
as detailed technical guidance, provides insights into accessibility 
guidelines and laws worldwide:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/glasshaus

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
 - Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

*9: DISCUSSION FORUM: This month, E-Access Bulletin would 
like to put its own call for information out about accessible online 
dicussion forums. We are planning to develop fully accessible online 
debate software, to allow large groups of people to join in debates or 
discussions via the web and email.

We would therefore be interested to hear from blind internet users 
who have taken part in oniline debates, and would like to have input 
into our 'dream specification' for fully accessible software of this 
kind. Thanks very much in advance – input please to 
inbox@headstar.com


*10: LEARNING LANGUAGES: In our last issue, Samson Perera of 
the Sri Lanka Council for the Blind wrote in seeking materials in 
Braille, cassette or ASCII to help him learn about computer hardware, 
how to manage the Bios setup and also computer languages such as 
Java and C plus.

In response, Paul Magill of Australia suggested: “A great place to 
start if you are interested in learning computer languages and 
programming is the Blind Programming site: 
http://www.blindprogramming.com

The E-Access Bulletin team has since joined the email list at this site 
and can strongly endorse this recommendation – it is an excellent 
resource.

In a second valuable response, Sally Hutchinson of the RNIB wrote in 
to say her organisation holds a wide range of titles on Bios, Java and 
C Plus available in Braille or cassette. For information on loaning or 
purchasing any of these titles, contact Maxine Jones at the RNIB 
Export Team on exports@rnib.org.uk


*11: FIREWORKS DISPLAY: Kate Page of the wildlife 
conservation agency English Nature would like to know if pop-up 
menus created using the web animation software Macromedia 
Fireworks are accessible using JAWS 4.0 – “I can't find any 
keystrokes to access them,” she says. [Responses to 
inbox@headstar.com].

[Section two ends.]


*12: SECTION THREE: ANALYSIS
- DRAFT COMMUNICATIONS BILL

* MORE HOT AIR THAN WIND OF CHANGE.
by Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com

When technology comes to define a historical period - as it has in our 
own Digital Age – its significance cannot be measured in sets of dry 
figures. The Digital Age signals new expectations about how fluidly 
we communicate, and our access to information, other people, and 
institutions.

In this context, the UK Government’s draft Communication Bill 
makes disappointing reading, cramped by a vision of market forces as 
the primary agent for positive change, and with a corresponding belief 
that its single biggest contribution will be to intervene as little as 
possible. This is not an encouraging sign for visually impaired people, 
who might otherwise hope that the shift to digital technologies could 
change the landscape of opportunities, narrowing the gap between 
themselves and sighted people. The early signs are that the 
government will do little to encourage this, and that the transition to 
digital technologies in TV and radio may even widen the gap. 

A recent dissection of the draft proposals by the RNIB concludes: 
“Blind, partially sighted and deafblind people rightly feel that they 
suffer huge discrimination in and exclusion from digital 
communications services. They feel by and large that government is 
not listening to or acting on their concerns in this area.”

The bill sets out the powers and responsibilities of the sprawling new 
communications industry regulator Ofcom, which is charged with 
protecting the interests of service users and setting licence terms for 
telecommunications, TV and radio service providers.

Potentially at least, Ofcom is well placed to push accessibility further 
up the digital agenda. However, the bill shows little ambition in this 
area. For example, although it lays down targets for audio-described 
digital TV content, these are pegged at ten per cent of all services. 
Even worse, service providers have 10 years from launch to reach 
even this low quota. According to the RNIB, a target of 50 percent 
audio-described content is far more desirable and achievable and was 
actually considered up to the final committee stages of the bill’s 
history. 

More positively, the bill does extend the audio-description quotas 
from terrestrial to satellite and cable services. In an unpublished 
assessment, the government reportedly justifies this on the grounds 
that public interest outweighs any potential impact on the industry. 
According to an RNIB source, the assessment concluded: “While 
there are costs to industry, particularly as regards subtitling, signing 
and audio description, these have to be set against the resulting 
considerable social benefits.” Clearly, the government does at least 
partially acknowledge the principle that it has a role in shaping the 
market for desirable ends. The argument concerns how it should 
intervene. 

Content is only one of three issues that need to be tackled for truly 
accessible digital services, the other two being delivery and reception. 
With digital terrestrial TV for example, only 45 households currently 
have access to audio-described services through a prototype module, 
with commercial availability still a long way off. 

According to the RNIB, manufacturers are resistant to incorporating 
the technology within set-top boxes, while service providers and the 
government appears to be unwilling to subsidise an affordable module 
that could be bought separately.

In the House of Commons recently, the Labour MP Roger Berry 
questioned the Department of Culture, Media and Sport on whether 
the government will ensure that future digital TVs and set-top boxes 
will be enabled for audio-description.

The relevant government minister, Kim Howells, replied that “the 
design features and production of set top boxes are matters for the 
manufacturers to decide”. Past experience suggests that these 
decisions are unlikely to break new ground – “Manufacturers will do 
whatever they can to avoid new standards,” says Leen Petre of the 
RNIB. 

Although cable services have been available for longer, they have 
made even less progress – at present, no-one is able to receive audio-
described content on cable. Although there are no significant 
technology barriers, early improvements are unlikely given the 
volatile position of service providers, with major players NTL and 
Telewest struggling with a mountain of debt, poor records of service 
and constant changes in the boardroom.

Only satellite services have made much headway, with Sky Digital 
offering a basic audio-described service, although Sky’s own 
electronic programme guides have been criticised for poor 
accessibility. The RNIB has called on the government to require all 
digital broadcasters to follow Sky’s lead and make audio description 
available through software downloads, but this would still require 
upgraded set-top boxes and TVs.

Overall, the bill disappoints with its lack of commitment. It 
acknowledges the potential for a regulator to further the interests of 
disabled people, but then fails to give Ofcom the powers needed to 
fully play that role. 

In particular, it equivocates over Ofcom’s responsibilities, charging 
the watchdog to “have regard to” the needs of disabled people “where 
it appears relevant”. It makes only tentative moves to increase levels 
of accessible content and effectively ducks any responsibility for 
ensuring that user equipment is both accessible and affordable.

[Section three ends.]


*13: SECTION FOUR: NET HISTORY.
- 'PHREAKING'

* TELEPHONE ENGAGED.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

Communications technnologies are now a source of freedom, 
education and entertainment for millions of visually impaired people. 
But blind people have also been involved in some of the more 
alternative, not to mention illegal, uses of technology over the years –
activities generally grouped under the heading of 'hacking'.

In the 1960s and early 1970s, for example, the so called 'phone 
phreakers' took advantage of the fact that phone networks of the time 
in the UK and US sent a small number of switching tones over the 
same wire that transmitted sound from the mouthpiece. This meant 
the ordinary phone user could send commands to the network 
switches by making sounds into the mouthpiece. Observation of the 
noises phones made in use, plus subterfuge and a generous dose of 
trial and error were enough to give phreakers the repetoire of noises 
needed to make free calls, set up conference calls or listen in to other 
people.

Among the first to discover the loophole in the US phone system was 
Joe Engressia, who as a blind child had begun to explore the phone, 
using his perfectly pitched whistle. A highly-tuned aural awareness 
such as Engressia's is also useful in other ways, according to fellow 
pioneer Bill Acker: "It helps you know where you are in the 
network."

Acker, who is also blind, says his love affair with the phone began 
when he found out that "the phone makes such wonderful, wonderful 
noises". By the time he was a teenager at the Dominican LaVelle 
School for the Blind in the Bronx, his entanglement was deepening. "I 
was phreaking four, five, six, seven hours a day. I lived in the 
network."

However, Engressia's conviction for toll fraud in mid-1971 showed 
that phreaking carried considerable risks. These risks increased 
further in the October 1971 when public attention was drawn to the 
phenomenon by the publication of an exposé in Esquire magazine 
(http://www.webcrunchers.com/crunch/esq-art.html).

Before the end of 1971 Acker was beginning to feel the heat himself, 
with New York Telephone Company investigator Tom Duffy calling 
at to his school having heard Acker had said he could make free calls 
for one of the school's teaching nuns to her native Ireland.

"I was scared to death," Acker says. "But I had watched enough TV 
to say 'I have the right to remain silent.' Duffy then left the room for a 
few minutes, giving me time to think. 'What am I afraid of?' I thought. 
'Am I afraid they will cart me off to jail? Why am I in a cold sweat?' 
In the end I realised I was scared simply because they might find a 
way to stop me from doing it."

Acker also offers another reason for silence: "Protecting myself was 
very much on my mind, but protecting my brothers and sisters in 
crime was also certainly high on the agenda."

Phreakers enjoyed a strong camaraderie, regularly calling one another 
and exchanging ideas in conference calls set up using a 'bluebox' - 
one of the earliest tone generators, later famously made and used by 
Apple Computers founder Steve Wozniak 
(http://ei.cs.vt.edu/%7Ehistory/WOZNIAK.HTM).

"Most often phreaked calls were to other phreaks," Acker says. The 
fraternity continues to this day, with many maintaining contact. 
Others, however, have drifted off.

Whatever his reasons, Acker's silence meant Duffy had little choice 
but to call at his mother's house. Here, to Acker's annoyance, his 
mother agreed to hand some of his tools of the trade including his 
highly-prized 'bluebox', built into an old typewriter case. "My mother 
was conflicted," Acker now says. "She was aware that this 
[phreaking] was important to my development, but found it difficult 
to deal with the illegality."

Acker had less trouble dealing with it, however, and was soon 
equipped with a new, pocketsized bluebox. But in 1976 his number 
was up, and he was indicted for conspiracy to commit toll fraud, 
having been recorded on a police wire tap advising a Florida-based 
phreak called Dave on how to call Haiti using an exchange in the 
Dominican Republic. Dave was convicted, but Acker got away on a 
technicality. Despite his good fortune, he says: "The indictment did 
put the fear of God into me."

On the more positive side, phreaking was an early example of how a 
communications network could be used to enable a diverse, 
geographically dispersed set of people work together to solve 
complex technical problems.

And, although the advent of digital telephony has made phreaking a 
thing of the past, Acker's enthusiasm for collaborative networking 
continues through his participation in open source programming 
project Linux Speakup (http://www.linux-speakup.org). "My focus is 
still on the network," he says.

[Section four ends.]


*14: SECTION FIVE: WRITING COMPETITION
- FIRST PRIZE.

The following story by Neill McBride has won first prize in our 
competition for creative writing on the topic 'keeping in touch with 
technology'. Neill wins a 'Victor' e-book reader worth more than 300 
pounds, donated by VisuAide (http://www.visuaide.com). Thanks to 
everyone who sent in an entry – the standard was truly exceptional. In 
our next issue we will publish details of our runners-up, who will 
each receive a set of classic e-books on CD.

- 'OASIS', by Neill McBride.

Year: 2006.

Mary sighed as she turned page after page of the Sunday newspaper 
only to find article after article on the heroic England squad.  England 
had taken on the might of Germany in the World Cup Final and won, 
but that was over a week ago!  'You'd think they'd have gotten over it 
by now' Mary thought.  Football just wasn't her thing.  Despairing she 
turned the final few pages that would inevitably lead to the sports 
section when her eyes caught the headline: 'OASIS development 
project gets public and private backing'. Mary read on with interest.

Year: 2010.

Eve woke from a deep sleep to the sound of the clock radio.  It had 
been a weekend of unimaginable celebrations as England regained the 
World Cup in an epic final against Brazil.

"Mark, what time is it?" Eve asked sleepily.  

"Eight sixteen," came Mark's reply.  

"Oh no!" Eve sighed as she threw back the bed sheets and struggled 
to her feet.  "I'm going to be late again unless I get a move on."  

Mark opened the curtains as Eve headed for the shower.  With 
morning daylight filling the room Eve called back, "Mark, could you 
make me a coffee? I'm going to have to drink it on the run."

"Okay," Mark replied.

Within twenty minutes Eve was washed, dressed and with coffee cup 
in hand heading for the front door. Mark opened the door as Eve 
grabbed her white cane and stepped into the foyer. "Please don't 
forget to organise the shopping," Eve reminded Mark, "and you'd 
better order an extra bottle of wine as my mum's visiting tonight."

"I will arrange for the shopping to be delivered at six pm" replied 
Mark. Mark closed the door as Eve headed for the lift.

That evening Eve finished putting away the final bits and pieces of 
the shopping when the doorbell rang. "It is Mrs Stewart," Mark 
announced as the front door opened. "Hello Mrs Stewart.  I hope you 
had a pleasant journey?"

Mrs Stewart, without a response, headed for the kitchen where she 
could hear Eve calling. "Hi darling, and how are you?"

"Fine," came Eve's reply. "How was the journey?

"Oh, much the same as usual but at least there was no delays!" .

"Mrs Stewart and Eve, would you like a coffee?" Mark asked politely. 
Mrs Stewart looked dismissively towards Eve and Eve could sense 
her mum's discomfort.

"No thanks Mark," Eve answered, "I'll open a bottle of wine instead. 
You'd prefer a glass of wine mum?"

"Yes, that'll be lovely," Eve's mum replied.

The glasses were poured and Eve and her mum chatted about dad, 
family, home, work and all those other things that fill the void when a 
child lives far from home. Eve loved the monthly visit from her mum.  
The chance to catch up, face to face, with all the news from home 
meant so much more than telephone conversations and emails, but 
Eve knew her mum felt uncomfortable in her flat and, although, her 
mum wouldn't admit it, she knew it was because of Mark.

With dinner behind them, and the wine glasses refilled, Eve decided 
to broach the subject of Mark once more.  "Mum, you do know I'm 
happy living here, but do you think you'll ever get used to having 
Mark around?"
 
"Of course darling," Mrs Stewart answered, "it doesn't bother me in 
the slightest."

"Are you sure mum?" asked Eve.  "Because you haven't answered 
Mark all night and I don't recall in all your visits hearing you speak to 
Mark."

"I'm sorry darling.  It's difficult for me; maybe it's a generation thing.  
When I put you forward for the OASIS Development Project I had 
know idea it would have been so, " Eve's mum paused searching for 
the right words, "so unconventional."

"Mum I love it here and if you just relaxed and gave it a go you'd 
soon love it too.  Mark is great.  He really looks after me and I feel 
safe here in my flat knowing Mark's with me."

"Sweetheart, I really wish you wouldn't call it Mark.  It's simply a 
computer." Eve's mum interjected.

"Mark is an online automated security and information system." Eve 
corrected her mother's description.  "Mark keeps everything in check 
for me and it's great.  You know the problems I've had keeping tabs 
on things, well, Mark sorts all that out for me now."

"I know dear, but I don't think I'll ever feel comfortable talking to it." 

"Please mum, just give it a go," Eve cajoled.

So, with another long drink of wine, Eve's mum took a deep breath 
and spoke. "Okay. Mark, if we're going to get on please don't call me 
Mrs Stewart. Call me Mary."

[Section five ends.]


* HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject 
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be 
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access 
bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

* PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

[Issue ends.]
