* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid to those using screen readers, all headings 
begin with an asterisk and end with a full stop. Please let us know if there 
is anything else we could do to make navigation of the bulletin easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 26, FEBRUARY 2002.

* CONTENTS.

- RNIB to audit sites for free in 'See it right' campaign.

- E-voting could boost access: local election trials.

- Access costs not excessive, says powerful European committee.

- Irish bill goes back to drawing board - government bows to objections.

- Treasury ahead in government awards.

- News in brief: Web hosting for visually impaired; Joe Clark book; 
Book sharing service launches.

Section two - ‘The Inbox'
Readers forum.

Section three: E-learning
- Open door policy: the Open University is has ambitions to become the 
UK's leader in accessible e-learning technology, Dan Jellinek reports.

Section four: Conference preview – CSUN.
This year's ‘Technologies and persons with disabilities’ conference looks 
at training and educational issues, writes Phil Cain.

Section five: Health – access to electronic records.
The introduction of electronic health records should inspire doctors to 
make their communications more accessible, says Kevin Carey.

[Contents ends.]


* SECTION ONE - NEWS.

* RNIB TO AUDIT SITES FOR FREE.

The RNIB is to offer free web site audits to a series of selected high-
profile UK organisations over the next two years, in a new phase of its 
‘See it right’ campaign funded by financial services group Standard Life.

Standard Life is providing 50,000 pounds a year for two years, plus a 
member of staff on secondment, to allow RNIB to offer the free audits to 
around 50 organisations a year at an estimated cost of between 600 and 
1,450 pounds per audit. After two years the process will be reviewed.

Anyone is free to apply, but the organisations to be audited will be 
selected to represent a cross-section of sectors including retail, charity, 
travel, education, utility and telecommunications, and government. It is 
hoped the initiative will raise awareness of web accessibility issues 
across society.

The ‘See it right’ scheme has already audited several major organisations 
including Tesco.com, Marks & Spencer, PSI Group, BT, the British 
Library, and the government’s web portal UK Online. Standard Life is 
committed to making all of its own web sites accessible by the end of the 
year.

The audits will use the world wide web consortium’s ‘WAI’ accessibility 
standards (http://www.w3c.org/wai), and the RNIB estimates that the 
cost of making the average site accessible following audit will be 
between one and two per cent of original design costs.

Colin Low, the chairman of RNIB, said the inaccessibility of most web 
sites currently means that for example “blind people were not able to fill 
in census returns in privacy online, or book a seat at the theatre without 
having to hang on the telephone for an eternity”.

He said the internet could bring a vast amount of information within 
reach of blind people for the first time, and with 8.7 million people with 
disabilities in the UK exercising spending power of more than 40 billion 
pounds, it makes strong business sense for companies to embrace 
inclusive design.


* E-VOTING COULD BOOST ACCESS.

This year's UK local government elections, due to take place in May, 
will see trials of internet voting, telephone voting and electronic kiosk 
voting overseen by the Department for Transport, Local Government and 
the Regions.

One of the most compelling arguments for electronic voting is that it 
could offer people with disabilities, including the blind and visually 
impaired, the chance to vote in complete privacy for the first time.

Five local authorities - Nantwich, Liverpool, Sheffield, Swindon and St 
Albans - will offer constituents the chance to vote using ordinary 
computers or phones. Two of these - Sheffield and St Albans - together 
with Chester, will also offer the option to vote using a computer kiosk. It 
is not known if the kiosks will contain speech software or if they will 
have tactile cues on the keypads.

Not all of these trials have had details of their private sector partners 
confirmed, but Liverpool and Sheffield city councils are in talks with 
telecoms giant BT and online voting company election.com; while 
Swindon is believed to be discussing its options with the elections body 
Electoral Reform Services. Both BT and the ERS said their systems 
would be accessible.

The DTLR has told E-Access Bulletin that all of the systems shortlisted 
will be compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act.

Meanwhile the Irish government this week announced it too is to try out 
electronic voting systems in May. Kiosk systems will be used to cast and 
count votes in Dublin North, Dublin West and Meath in the country's 
upcoming general election. However, the government has ruled out the 
use of a voice-activated voting system in the trial because of its cost. See:
http://www.environ.ie/pressindex.html


* ACCESS COSTS NOT "EXCESSIVE".

EU member states need to be told web accessibility need not be 
excessively expensive, the European Union's powerful Economic and 
Social Committee said this week.

The comments came in response to a recent European Commission 
communication encouraging European institutions and member states to 
make their web presence accessible (see EAB, October and November 
2001).

The committee also said there is a need for developers and disabled users 
to participate in joint training. It pledged to make its own web site 
accessible by the end of the year.

The pronouncements follow research into accessibility issues by Miguel 
Angel Cabra de Luna, director of Spanish charity for the blind ONCE, on 
behalf of the ESC. A report will be posted shortly onto the committee's 
web site (http://www.esc.eu.int).


* IRISH BILL GOES BACK TO DRAWING BOARD.

The Irish government has decided to postpone the reading of its 
Disability Bill in the Dial, the Irish parliament, in the face of "unanimous 
objections" from disability rights organisations during the consultation 
period.

The bill, which was due to be introduced last week, was lambasted by 
pressure groups which said it fails to confer sufficient rights to people 
with disabilities, their parents, siblings and carers.

The draft bill did say public sector bodies must ensure their buildings and 
information are made available to everyone, "so far as practicable". But 
critics pointed out that Section 47 of the bill would deny the right to 
redress through civil courts.

According to Gerry Ellis, an accessibility consultant and former 
chairperson of People with Disabilities in Ireland: "There is nothing [in 
the bill] about any rights to access to information technology. No powers 
for any ombudsman or other authority to ensure access. No mention of 
public procurement policy including accessibility as part of its criteria. 
Nothing about accessibility being a condition for the granting of a third-
generation mobile phone licence. In other words, there may be theory, 
but nothing to make us feel that there will be actual progress."

To read more about the bill, see the following accessible links site 
compiled by campaigner Barry McMullin:
http://wai.rince.ie/white-papers/2002/legislation


* TREASURY OF INFORMATION.

Accessibility is a central judging criteria for this year’s UK Government 
Internet Awards, due to be announced on 18 March by the government's 
Central Office of Information.

E-Access Bulletin understands that the HM Treasury web site 
(http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk) is favourite to win a special award for 
accessibility. The site is approved by the ‘Bobby’ accessibility checker 
(http://www.cast.org/bobby) and offers a full text-only version.

The overall winner of best government site will also be a site with clear 
layout and easy navigation. For more information on the awards see:
http://www.internetforum.gov.uk


* NEWS IN BRIEF:

* VIP HOSTING: A web hosting service specifically aimed at blind and 
visually impaired people, 'VIP Lorimernet', was launched last month:
http://www.lorimernet.co.uk

* NOVEL BOOK: 'Building accessible web sites', a book by US media 
access guru Joe Clark, is due out this spring:
http://www.joeclark.org/book

* SHARE LAUNCH: Bookshare, the online e-book sharing platform, 
launched last week, offering access to bestsellers including A Beautiful 
Mind, John Adams, and The Fellowship of the Ring. At present 
copyright restrictions mean the service is available only to disabled US 
citizens:
http://www.bookshare.org

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO - ‘THE INBOX’
- READERS’ FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

* XP RESULT: In our last issue Paul Evans, Technology Project Officer 
with the RNIB's Technology in Learning and Employment programme, 
asked for information on Windows XP and accessibility. Erin Renschler 
of Microsoft's corporate PR agency obliged with a link to a relevant 
feature on Microsoft's web site:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/xp
Erin also sent in another relevant press release and a fact sheet for Paul. 
If other readers are interested in receiving a copy of these please email 
Tamara Fletcher on tamara@headstar.com with a message saying 'XP 
Access'.

* OUTLOOK FAIR: Meanwhile Sandy Bannister is looking for a 
manual or tutorial on Microsoft Outlook 2000. If anyone knows of one 
which is accessible please email inbox@headstar.com

[Section two ends.]


* SECTION THREE: E-LEARNING
- OPEN UNIVERSITY.

* OPEN DOOR POLICY.

The Open University (http://www.open.ac.uk), the distance-learning 
institution that is Britain’s largest higher education body, is set to 
become the UK’s largest developer of accessible learning technology as 
well.

The OU currently serves around 140,000 undergraduate students, of 
whom more than 7,500 have some kind of disability. Around 900 are 
blind or visually impaired.

As a distance learning pioneer, technology plays a central role in the 
university’s courses, with its own electronic conferencing system 
allowing students on more than 150 courses to exchange more than 
150,000 messages a day.

Last year, the university announced in this bulletin that it was to create a 
Centre for Assistive Technology and Enabling Research (CATER) for 
disabled students, backed by one million UK pounds from the Higher 
Education Funding Council for England, in the largest project of its kind 
in the UK (see E-Access Bulletin, January 2001).

The centre is now up and running and headed by Ralph Keats, who used 
the RNIB’s recent ‘Techshare’ conference to explain the university’s 
plans for improving access.

“Far too often in the past we have created courses and then looked at 
accessibility afterwards as a bolt-on,” he said. “We had to fight for every 
scrap of funding. But now it is at the heart of everything we do – I can’t 
believe the changes that have taken place over the past three years.”

The Open University has recently been granted the power to act as its 
own awarding authority for disabled student allowances, without having 
to go through central government, Keats said. Since each student with 
disabilities may require as much as 4,500 pounds worth of specialist 
technology for work leading to a degree, “we acquired a lot of buying 
power overnight. Last year we spent three million pounds on access 
technology.”

Increased influence came along with the spending power, he said, 
“Suppliers want your business and so will work with you and we can 
help to raise standards."

CATER is gearing up to work with everyone involved in putting out OU 
courses, from graphic designers to those creating CD-ROM packs, to 
help ensure their work is accessible. It is also going to assess new 
learning technologies as they appear, for their potential.

One of the main access technologies the university is currently 
developing is ‘DREAM’ (Digitally Recorded Educational Audio 
Materials), a project which intends to replace analogue audio recording 
of course materials with digital recording, to enhance their quality, 
interactivity and accessibility.

Some 1,200 OU students currently access courses by audio cassette, 
including the 900 visually impaired people plus a further 300 with 
dyslexia or manual impairments. Sound quality can be poor, however, 
and degrades over time, and searching for material across a course of 
several cassettes is all but impossible. Furthermore when courses are 
revised every few years, an entirely new set of analogue tapes needs to 
be created.

With digitised texts, there are a range of user interfaces from which 
students can choose, as well as approved accessible web interfaces to 
course information and work for blind students.

Another institution leading the way in accessible online learning is the 
Royal National College for the Blind (http://www.rncb.ac.uk), an 
independent national and international specialist further education 
college.

“The college aims to help learners control and manage their own 
learning, and this brings a heavy emphasis on control of computer 
systems,” said Tim Ashmore, RNCB learning support manager.

“However, there is no consistent national approach at the moment in 
training teachers in online learning. There are pockets of activity, for 
example at the education technology agency Becta, but where is the 
consistent strategy that we can tap into?”

The college has its own intranet for teachers and students, ‘RNC 
Intralearn’, and students are gradually taught how to access learning 
materials for themselves, Ashmore said. “Many learners do not  have the 
basic skills, so we are making it part of the core curriculum. There are 
other problems, including funding, but this is the only way to go, not 
least because we want our learners to continue to use these technology 
skills beyond their college courses.”

Shirley Evans, RNCB learning technology co-ordinator, said the college 
had reviewed around 30 different ‘virtual learning environment’ products 
for their accessibility. “Accessibility as a huge issue, but the core test 
seemed to be: did the environment work with a screen reader?” she said.

The answer to many of the problems faced by the college and other 
educational institutions as likely to be at least partly the establishment of 
specialist teams of teachers nationally who could help teachers locally 
with accessibility issues, Evans said.

Whatever the solutions, time is running out for both specialist and 
mainstream education providers to get these issues right. Under the new 
Special Educational Needs Disabilities Act (SENDA), from September 
2002 it will be unlawful for all education providers to discriminate 
against disabled students by treating them less favourably than others, 
and institutions will be required to make adjustments including making 
electronic courseware accessible; and allowing disabled people equal 
access to technical support for their equipment (see 
http://www.techdis.ac.uk/articles/SENDRE.htm).

The Open University’s Ralph Keats acknowledges that there will always 
be problems making some types of course accessible, for example music 
courses where special notations may be used, current affairs courses 
where material needed to be up to the minute, and any new course where 
materials were still being developed.

But he said the SENDA plus possible support from the Human Rights 
Act meant visually impaired students would have more legislative help 
than ever before in seeking accessibility. “We’ve never had it so good.”

[Section three ends.]


* SECTION FOUR: CONFERENCE PREVIEW
- CSUN.

* A VIRTUAL TRAINING COMMUNITY.

This year's annual 'Technologies and persons with disabilities' 
conference at the Center on Disabilities, California State University 
(CSUN – http://www.csun.edu/cod) is focusing on the educational 
challenges of assistive technology. Topics to be covered include training, 
online teaching, and the access conundrums posed by non-Roman 
writing systems such as Braille, mathematics and musical notation.

The following is a round-up of some of the main sessions relating to 
blindness and visual impairment, with links to the relevant session 
summaries.

Hans Russman of the Institute for Blind and Partially Sighted in 
Denmark has created a training course to help blind computer users pick 
up tips from sighted colleagues. To do this the institute uses tactile 
diagrams to illustrate the format of typical Windows screens:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/163.htm

Brian Hardy and Brian Charlson, meanwhile, will outline the results of a 
US-Australian trial of 'community models' in training people to use 
information technology outside the workplace:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/156.htm

A paper outlining how UK-based trainer's skills will in the future be 
assessed, certified and updated will be presented by Steve Tyler, from 
the RNIB, and Sarah Morley of the British Computer Association for the 
Blind:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/153.htm
Meanwhile Elizabeth Cohen and Walter Kimble of the University of 
Southern Maine will explain how they are using the internet to train and 
certify university educators in assistive technology:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/232.htm

Debra Bauder from the University Of Louisville and Debbie Sharon of 
the Bluegrass Technology Center will explain how assistive technology 
training is delivered direct to the end user for free in Kentucky using the 
internet:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/225.htm

More general e-learning topics are also given prominent billing with a 
talk on the development of peer-reviewed lecture note distribution 
platform Merlot:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/9.htm
There will also be a demonstration of software that creates accessible 
narrated PowerPoint presentations, by Dick Banks of Equal Access to 
Software and Information:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/229.htm

Bill McAmis of the Bakersfield City School District will explain how his 
education authority installed a bilingual and accessible intranet in its 
elementary schools in California. To give an idea of the scale of the 
challenge, McAmis notes that the schools teach more than 28,000 
elementary school students:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/295.htm

Donna McNear of Rum River Special Education Cooperative and Larry 
Lewis and Jim Halliday of HumanWare will also examine bilingualism 
in the classroom, in considering the high tech needs of students learning 
in Braille:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/102.htm

For those struggling to learn Braille, Mimi Berman from Independent 
Living Aids in Jericho will demonstrate the BrailleMaster. The machine 
teaches Braille dot patterns, level two contractions and the most 
commonly used English words:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/249.htm

Glen Gordon of Freedom Scientific will preview the company's next 
generation of Braille note-taking devices. These will incorporate a web 
browser and the ability to play streaming audio:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/111.htm

VisuAide's Yvan Lagace will preview the development of a portable 
orientation device that could be used in conjunction with Braille note 
takers by the end of June this year. Victor Escort, as the global 
positioning system (GPS) will be known, will be adapted to work with a 
wider range of personal digital assistants in 2003:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/268.htm

Yoshinobu Maeda of Japan's Niigata University will present research 
suggesting that the descriptions given to users of GPS orientation 
systems should give information about both landmarks and intersections:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/296.htm

The advent of Section 508, which requires US government agencies to 
provide accessible information, is high on the CSUN agenda this year. 
Among presentations on this topic is one from representatives of the US 
Internal Revenue Service, which will say: "Section 508 provides a 
tremendous opportunity for us to improve service to all of our 
customers":
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/49.htm

Karl Hebenstreit Jr of the General Services Administration, the US 
procurement department, will outline a development process known as 
'bootstrapping' in which the users of software help make it more 
accessible:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/195.htm

Jim Fruchterman, the man behind the development of the JAWS 
screenreader and now head of technology nonprofit Benetech, will 
provide an update on the progress of the recently launched US digital 
book sharing platform Bookshare:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/135.htm
Meanwhile, Larry Skutchan and Keith Creasy from the American 
Printing House for the Blind will show how to create electronic books in 
the new DAISY 3.0 e-book format using a program called BookMaster. 
Skutchan told E-Access Bulletin that the software is expected to be 
released in April and will cost around 350 dollars:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/158.htm

Also debuting at CSUN are prototype web browser WebIE and 
Organiser, an aptly named personal organiser. Paul Blenkhorn and 
Gareth Evans, the creators of these two pieces of Microsoft-enhancement 
software, conducted their research at the University of Manchester 
Institute of Science and Technology in the UK, with the financial 
assistance of the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/55.htm

Deborah Gilden from the Kettlewell Eye Research Institute is also 
hoping to help visually impaired people make the most of Microsoft 
software. "Few realise that Microsoft Office applications include many 
features that, although not intended for low-vision viewers, can serve as 
even more powerful and flexible tools for making screen images 
accessible," Gilden says:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/206.htm

John Gardner of Oregon State University will announce progress in 
solving the knotty problem of providing access to mathematical notation 
(see section three, January 2002). A beta version of a mathematical text 
editing suite called WinTriangle has been in testing since September last 
year:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/300.htm
Nancilu McClellan will also address the problem of accessible 
mathematics in a talk outlining how to use the speech recognition 
capabilities of Dragon's NaturallySpeaking Professional and Dragon 
Dictate:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/103.htm

William McCann and David Pinto of Dancing Dots will demonstrate 
how JAWS screenreader scripts can be used by blind people to record, 
edit and notate music using mainstream computers packages:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/264.htm

On an international note, Hiroyuki Nakamura from the Japanese Institute 
for Communication Environment will plead for harmonisation in the 
accessibility standards-setting processes being developed by different 
countries. He outlines how Japanese access rules have become confusing 
and contradictory because they have been set by two different bodies, the 
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications and the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002/proceedings/272.htm

[Section four ends.]


* SECTION FIVE: HEALTH
- ELECTRONIC RECORDS.

* PSYCHOLOGY BEFORE TECHNOLOGY.
by Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

The key question in Umberto Eco’s novel ‘The name of the rose’ is 
whether the monks are keeping their books from people or for them. The 
same question might be put to lawyers stubbornly sticking to their Latin 
and doctors who are still wedded to Greek. This may be fine enough in 
law where most people expect lawyers to represent them but it is no 
longer acceptable in health care, where people want much more control 
over what happens to them.

We ought to remember it is less than two years since a paediatrician was 
attacked because vigilantes thought he was a paedophile. Well, you may 
know the difference between a -trician and a -phile but how many of us 
know our -ectomy from our -otomy? Taking more control of our bodies 
requires a better understanding of what clinicians are doing, or failing to 
do.

Dropping the Greek will no doubt help, but we will need to go a good 
deal further than this in ensuring the digitisation of medical records also 
increases their accessibility and usefulness. A record that is either too 
vague or too indicative is bound to cause enquiry and distress. So it is not 
only a matter of words but of understanding the way that human beings 
handle information.

If you have a cancer, to be told that simply there are a variety of 
measures that might be taken or, conversely, to be given a single stark 
statistic relating to the probable cause or outcome of the disease and 
nothing else, is bound to cause concern.

The problem is further complicated by the fact that the information 
contained in a patient’s digital record will be compared with a mass of 
health and medical information found by patients on the web, some from 
NHS sites but much of it from the sites of non-governmental 
organisations, support groups, or campaigning organisations that my rely 
on talking up a problem to raise funds for dealing with it, not to mention 
an explosion of ‘alternative’ therapy sites from the relatively mainstream 
to the Druidic.

If we look at digital medical records there are really three areas of 
interest for the patient: what is this condition; how does it affect me; and 
what should I do? The first of these questions hardly concerns traditional 
medical records because professionals already know the background 
detail, and the third is not strictly a matter for a record either, since it 
concerns the future. But in the mind of the patient, all three have great 
weight.

Even if you are inclined to adopt a wholly mechanistic view of physical 
wellbeing, that the brain has nothing to do with a stomach condition, for 
example, there is still a serious problem in translating anatomy and 
chemistry into humanity. With respect to personalising the condition, 
there is not only the question of the syndrome as it relates to an 
individual but there is also, crucially, the question of statistical 
probability. And despite being a society that depends to a massive degree 
on the manipulation of information we are, by and large, statistically 
illiterate.

Most of us cannot distinguish the causal from the contingent nor the 
highly probable from the statistically possible. We live in an age where 
the media have a vested interest in discrediting the sane statistical truth, 
the most startling recent health-related examples being the brief hysteria 
over necrotising fasciitis (the “flesh-eating bug”) and continuing wild 
stories about cloning.

Finally there are further, more prosaic requirements for people be able to 
get hold of the information they need. Will the print size and font be 
adjustable, for example, or will people be able to choose between image 
maps and text explanations? However these questions, though vitally 
important, are trivial next to the ones posed above about the fundamental 
accessibility and usefulness of the information in the record. Before we 
get too obsessed, yet again, with the technology, we need to look at the 
psychology.

NOTE: This article first appeared in our sister publication Future Health 
Bulletin (http://www.headstar.com/futurehealth). To subscribe to the 
plain text version of this bulletin email:
fh-text-subscribe@headstar.com
or for the HTML version email:
futurehealth-subscribe@headstar.com


[Section five ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You 
can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. 
Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this 
copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-
accessibility.com is also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
