* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid to those using screen readers, all headings 
begin with an asterisk and end with a full stop. Please let us know if there 
is anything else we could do to make navigation of the bulletin easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 25, JANUARY 2002.

* CONTENTS.

News:

Local authority sites 'a mixed bag'
- annual review of UK council web sites.

Mobile industry to guide itself
- companies exchange best practice ideas.

Classic heist movie captured in words
- ‘Ocean’s Eleven’ to release mid-February.

Call for European Treaty reform
- to encourage design for all philosophy.

Government site updated, at last
- disability.gov.uk relaunches.

News in brief: Irish disability bill; Keyboard tutorials; accessibility 
monitoring.

Section two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' correspondence. 

Section three: Focus. Mathematics: Beyond pencil and paper.
- Digitising the process of doing maths is proving surprisingly difficult, 
but computers are making it easier for blind mathematicians to engage 
with sighted colleagues.

Section four: Conference report. Design for all: Motivating the universal 
designer.
- European activists agree that something should be done to promote 
'design for all'. But there is no clear consensus on the best way forward.

Section five: Law. Access legislation jigsaw nears completion.
- Martin Sloan examines how the combination of evolving UK law and 
international standards may at last be set to provide a remedy for internet 
accessibility problems.

[Contents end.]


* SECTION ONE - NEWS.


* LOCAL AUTHORITY SITES 'A MIXED BAG'.

This year’s annual review of UK local authority web sites, due to be 
published in March by the Society for IT Management, will include an 
assessment of 30 council web sites for their accessibility to people with 
disabilities.

The 30 sites were chosen as among the best-developed and most 
‘transactional’ sites, for example those that allow people to pay council 
tax, reserve library books or interact with other local public services 
directly over the web.

Overall, the council sites are a mixed bag, E-Access Bulletin has learned. 
Problems found include unlabelled graphics; visual clutter; graphical 
links; general design and navigational inconsistencies; the use of frames; 
the use of ‘Flash’ animation without alternatives; and problems with text 
and background colours.

But many display a good grasp of accessibility including clear, resizable 
text; helpful information about how to navigate the site; pages dedicated 
to accessibility, and invitations for feedback on accessibility issues. All 
in all, council sites are ahead of commercial sites for accessibility, the 
report finds.

The accessibility assessments were carried out for SOCITM by the 
charity AbilityNet (http://www.abilitynet.co.uk). For more information 
and to place an advance order for ‘Better connected 2002 – a snapshot of 
council web sites’, email Martin Greenwood on 
SocitmInsightUK@cs.com


* MOBILE INDUSTRY TO GUIDE ITSELF.

UK mobile phone companies have agreed to collaborate to draw up a list 
of best practice to help make their services more accessible, but they will 
not be seeking the input of external groups, E-Access Bulletin has 
learned.

The decision to develop the standards was taken last week at the 
inaugural meeting of a new mobile industry acessibility group attended 
by the UK's mobile phone operators Vodafone, BT Cellnet, One2One 
and Orange (see also E-Access Bulletin, December 2001).

According to the group's chairman Mike Duxbury of Vodafone, the 
document will "give an honest overview of where we are now, and 
where we will be [in the future]". 

The next phase of the drafting process will be a meeting in April, to 
which mobile handset manufacturers and suppliers from outside the UK 
will also be invited. The input of consumer pressure groups or of the 
government telecoms regulator OFTEL will not be sought, however.

According to Duxbury the presence of pressure groups at such meetings 
can be counterproductive. And he said OFTEL was not forward-looking, 
and only issued regulation on the basis of "the technology of yesterday".


* CLASSIC HEIST MOVIE CAPTURED IN WORDS.

'Ocean's Eleven', the Warner Brothers remake of a 1960 classic gangster 
movie, is set to be the third audio-described film to be given a trial 
release in 11 cinemas across the UK in mid-February.

The move is the latest in a six month trial of a digital technology called 
the Cinema Subtitling System made by US-based DTS 
(http://www.dtsonline.com ) which allows cinemas to add an extra 
soundtrack to a film, in this case adding descriptions of the action 
between dialogue for blind and visually impaired people. The same 
system can also be used to superimpose subtitles for the benefit of the 
hearing-impaired and foreign language audiences.

An audio described version of fantasy film Harry Potter was released in 
December and Rat Race, an all-star road race comedy, is due out next 
week. David Mann, an RNIB campaigner who has a small amount of 
sight, said following a showing of Harry Potter in Belfast: "I didn't think 
Harry Potter was my thing, but I thought it was brilliant."

For more on upcoming screenings call the RNIB broadcasting team on 
020 7391 2398.


* CALL FOR EUROPEAN TREATY REFORM.

Treaty of Europe, the rulebook of the European Union, needs to be 
changed to encourage the 'design for all' philosophy for products and 
services, including those provided over the internet, a leading member of 
the European Parliament has said.

According to Richard Howitt, MEP for the East of England and President 
of the All-Party Disability Group of MEPs 
(http://www.richardhowitt.labour.co.uk), declaration 22 of article 95 of 
the Treaty of Amsterdam, the most recent version of the Treaty of 
Europe, needs to be made into a full article of its own.

This change would mean civil servants at the European Commission 
were obliged to ensure "institutions of the Community shall take account 
of the needs of persons with a disability” rather than simply being urged 
to do so, as they are under current rules. Crucially, the requirement to 
give this kind of consideration would extend to standards for products 
and services made at a European level.

Howitt's call came at a conference held in Brussels last month to consider 
what could be done to encourage designers to adopt the universal design 
philosophy. For a full conference report see section four, this issue.


* GOVERNMENT SITE UPDATED, AT LAST.

The UK government this week unveiled a long-awaited update of its 
disability information web site (http://www.disability.gov.uk), which it 
had previously neglected for almost a year (see E-Access Bulletin, 
November 2001).

The updated site contains a basic introduction to legislation protecting 
disabled people, and links to consultation documents and information 
campaigns run by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), the 
site's owner. One of the most useful new additions is a free-text search 
box.

A DWP spokesperson said the site is still under development, and that 
the department was committed to making this site as accessible and easy 
to use as possible. "We would welcome views on the accessibility and 
content of the site," he said.


* NEWS IN BRIEF:

DISABILITY BILL 2001: The Irish government has published a 
Disability Bill which will be heard in parliament later this year. If passed 
in its current form it will establish a Centre for Excellence in Universal 
Design whose remit would cover electronic systems:
http://www.gov.ie/bills28/bills/2001/6801/default.htm

KEYBOARD ABCs: John Wilson, writer and narrator of a series of 
tapes on blind computer access, has released new information about his 
'From the keyboard' series of manuals and tutorials. The cassettes give 
step-by-step lessons in how to use Windows, sound editors, CD burners 
and scan-and-read software using just the keyboard:
http://web.onetel.net.uk/~fromthekeyboard/ 

SITE WATCH: A web site accessibility testing service has been 
launched by US software company HiSoftware. The service, which starts 
at 50 US dollars a month, tests sites for compliance to key US and 
international accessibility standards:
http://www.accessibilitywatch.com

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO - ‘THE INBOX’
- READERS’ FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

* LOOKING OUT: In response to Andy Berry's request in last month's 
Inbox for reports on the 'LookOUT' screen reader or Magnice screen 
magnifier, from Choice Technology (http://www.screenreader.co.uk), 
Chris McMillan writes: "I have just this morning acquired by snail post 
the details of this for a friend who is not on the net, so over the next few 
weeks I may well find out if its any good. She's a total newbie, and I'm 
not sure if she has a computer even - but I know she wanted me to advise 
her on how useful it will be since she isn't in the market for the bells-
and-whistles packages like JAWS."

Mrs McMillan continues: "Its blurb sounds like it's what we've all been 
waiting for, but like your correspondent, I want to know what 'bog 
standard' users like myself think of it. I'm more into the Magnice side of 
it for personal use, though a combined version has its attractions for 
specific items." [Responses to inbox@headstar.com]

* SPEECH WAVE: Antonio Guimaraes writes: "One of your recent 
features ['Speech wave breaks over Europe', September issue] said that 
BeVocal (http://www.bevocal.com), Tellme (http://www.tellme.com), 
HeyAnita (http://www.heyanita.com), and other voice portals offer web 
access. I think this is misleading. I have used a couple of these, Tellme 
being the one I am most familiar with, and there are many features such 
as news, weather, driving directions, wake up calls available, but I can 
not browse the internet using these services. 

"I don't anticipate that we'll ever have full use of the web over the phone. 
Forget it! How does one save book marks, and navigate through links, 
and mark text to paste to clipboard, and save a web page, read tables and 
so on and so forth? There's something called Net by Phone 
(http://www.net-by-phone.com) which is very expensive, and claims to 
give easy access to the internet over the phone, but you will never catch 
me spending that kind of money on a service like that."

He concludes: "Blind people just need accurate training, and then they 
won't need someone to make the internet accessible by telephone." 
[Further thoughts on voice portals to inbox@headstar.com].

XP ACCESS: Paul Evans, Technology Project Officer with the RNIB's 
Technology in Learning and Employment programme, is compiling 
information about Windows XP and accessibility. Readers with any 
knowledge in this area are invited to email inbox@headstar.com

[Section two ends.]


* SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- MATHEMATICS.

* BEYOND PENCIL AND PAPER.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

Mathematicians are proud that their discipline has gained so much 
influence with the application of just a pencil, paper and a waste paper 
basket. But, while these are the accepted tools of the trade, the dots and 
squiggles that are the nuts and bolts of mathematics are largely 
innaccessible to blind people, whether on paper or a computer screen.

As Alistair Edwards, a researcher at the department of computer science 
at the University of York, told the RNIB's recent Techshare conference: 
"There is no reason why blind people cannot do the bit in the head . . . 
but they have difficulty with the 'paper'." Proving this point are the large 
number of blind people among the mathematical greats - people such as 
Leonhard Euler, Nicholas Saunderson, Lev Pontryagin, Alfred Loewy, 
Stephen Smale, WG Bickley, Bernard Morin and Joseph Plateau.

But the achievements of these exceptional individuals cannot obscure the 
fact the access problem presented by mathematical notation is, in the 
deadpan terminology favoured by mathematicians, “non-trivial”. A 
solution to this problem would not only mean a few more blind people 
would be able to become mathemeticians and prove “a sphere could be 
turned inside-out in a smooth manner”, as Smale did in 1959, but that 
many more people would be able to tot up their gas bill.

The fundamental difficulty faced here is that the reading of written 
mathematics depends on interpreting the relative positions of an 
enormous array of symbols on a two dimensional surface, while 
computer screenreaders and Braille convey their meaning simply by 
ordering of relatively limited number of symbols in just one dimension. 
To describe mathematical expressions in Braille or for a screenreader to 
interpret them requires an extremely complex codification and translation 
process.

In the case of Braille, the difficulty of the translation problem has led to 
the formation of a number of rival codes, each with their own loyal band 
of supporters. This fragmentation means that, unlike their sighted 
counterparts, people reading and writing Braille mathematics are not 
using a borderless language. To help resolve this problem there are 
moves afoot to unite the codes used in the UK, where a variety are used, 
with  the Nemeth code, which was made standard in the US in 1952.

Despite the lack of an international standard, Braille is still the most 
practical way for most students to perform mathematical manipulations, 
just as pencil and paper still beats the computer in the sighted world of 
maths. This is because written Braille allows blind mathematicians to 
move their fingers from one line to the next to jog their memories, in the 
same way as sighted people can by moving their eyes.

For an account of a frustrated attempt to produce a computer-based 
alternative to the old fashioned Brailler, see Alistair Edwards' 'Access to 
mathematics' notes:
http://www-users.cs.york.ac.uk/~alistair/Techshare.rtf

But being able to do mathematics alone or just share it with others using 
the same Braille code is not enough: to participate fully in mathematical 
discourse, blind people need to be able to access the work of their sighted 
counterparts. This is where computers are proving extremely useful, 
because they too need to be fed mathematical equations into a one 
dimensional form, and their interconnection over the internet is leading 
to standardisation.

Mathematicians' wish to communicate mathematical expressions using 
plain text email led to the creation in 1985 of the LaTeX typsetting 
language (http://www.latex-project.org) as a de-facto standard, 
mantained by an international working group.

Useful though it is, LaTeX is not the complete solution for the blind, 
however, being rather cumbersome and unintuitive in its raw form. To 
make matters worse there is no automated way of converting it into 
everyday speech or even standard Braille in the same way as it can be 
translated into graphics. It has even been mathematically proven that it is 
not possible to develop software to transcribe every LaTeX formula 
unambiguously into Braille.

Limited LaTeX-to-Braille translation programs do exist, with one of the 
most popular being MegaDots, made by US software company Duxbury 
(http://www.duxburysystems.com).

Partial solutions to the LaTeX-to-speech problem have also been 
developed. One of the more recent ones, Audio System for Technical 
Reading (ASTER), was developed by blind US-based mathematician 
'TV' Raman. Though it is not openly available a demonstration of 
ASTER is available on Raman's web site:
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/Info/People/raman/aster/aster-toplevel.html

Finally, the web standards body World Wide Web Consortium is 
engaged in an ongoing programme to create a standard for presenting 
mathematical expressions on web pages called MathML 
(http://www.w3.org/Math). This could be of potential use for visually 
impaired people, since the consortium says of its latest release: 
"MathML 2.0 attempts to capture something of the meaning behind 
equations rather than concentrating entirely on how they are going to be 
formatted out on the screen."

A gathering of those with an interest in the development of MathML is 
taking place in June this year in Chicago. See:
http://www.mathmlconference.org/2002

NOTE: E-Access Bulletin would love to hear from any student, teacher 
or mathemetician with views on this topic. Email inbox@headstar.com

[Section three ends.]


* SECTION FOUR: CONFERENCE REPORT
- DESIGN FOR ALL.

* MOTIVATING THE UNIVERSAL DESIGNER.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

The European Commission and the European Disability Forum, an 
international umbrella lobby group, recently assembled a high-level 
'round-table' working group to consider steps that could be taken to 
prompt designers of mainstream products and services, including 
electronic ones, to consider the needs of people with disabilities.

With the odd exception delegates to the round-table were agreed on the 
merits of the all-embracing design philosophy often known as 'design for 
all' or 'universal design'. Among the benefits mentioned were that it is 
relevant to both disabled and non-disabled people and that businesses 
that have adopted it have been rewarded with bigger market share and 
revenues.

However, delegates were also agreed that the design-for-all philosophy 
has so far failed to make sufficient inroads into the European commercial 
sector. Jan Steyaert (http://www.steyaert.org/jan), lecturer at the Fontys 
University of Professional Education in the Netherlands, said survey 
results indicate that awareness, resistance and sheer negligence are 
among the most common reasons for the low level of adoption. Steyaert 
said: "We talked to a company for instance that did the electronic 
versions of 21 regional newspapers in the Netherlands. They have the 
whole population of the Netherlands as their customer base, and the guy 
did not know about design for all: he did not know about the concept or 
the need for it."

Another problem pointed out by Steyaert is 'untidy implementation', like 
the inconsistent use of raised dots on the keys of mobile phones or the 
use of black on green on mobile phone screens. Steyaert's conclusions 
were drawn from research done for a European Commission funded 
project called Dissemination Action Supporting Design-for-All 
(http://www.dasda.org).

Many felt legislation is the best way to make sure design for all is 
adopted. Bas Treffers, a member of the European Disability Forum in the 
Netherlands, said the EU should strengthen public procurement rules to 
make access requirements binding, rather than simply being optional 
criteria as they are now. In particular, Treffers said, design-for-all 
compliance should be mandatory for EU-funded projects.

Developments in North America were a rallying call to the pro-
legislative lobby. Many cited the Americans with Disabilities Act and 
Section 508 of the US Rehabilitation Act 1973 Federal Acquisition 
Regulations (http://www.section508.gov) as examples of how changes to 
legislation and procurement policy can promote design for all. Other 
regulatory levers advocated at the conference including the incorporation 
of design for all in standards for consumer products, a process now under 
way in Europe.

The EDF is also calling for a new European non-discrimination directive, 
making it illegal to discriminate against disabled people. “We need a 
directive that includes sanctions for public or private companies that do 
not comply with it, and that gives the rights for NGOs and disabled 
individuals to bring to court companies that do not comply with that.”

Kevin Carey, director of the digital accessibility charity HumanITy, is 
skeptical about the possibility of creating legislation to enforce design for 
all. According to Carey the notion of design for all and the belief this 
approach could fulfill more or less all the needs of disabled people are 
too extreme. "No matter how good the designers are, as a blind person, 
nobody is ever going to get the Mona Lisa right for me," Carey said.

What is more, Carey said, "Either of these two statements would simply 
be minced by any decent lawyer." Because of this lack of legal rigour, 
Carey said he was more interested in MEP Richard Howitt's idea about 
changing declaration 22 of article 95 of the Treaty of Europe into 
something more concrete (see news, this issue).

[Section four ends.]


* SECTION FIVE: LAW
- DDA.

* ACCESS LEGISLATION JIGSAW NEARS COMPLETION?
by Martin Sloan  martin.sloan@orange.net

A combination of UK law, international guidelines and other 
international legal or tribunal precedents may finally be combining to 
help ensure the internet is made accessible for all.

Part three of the UK Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) 1995 came 
into force in October 1999, imposing a series of duties on service 
providers including:

- Not to refuse to provide, or deliberately not provide a service to a 
disabled person which he provides, or is prepared to provide to members 
of the public [section 19(1)(a)]

- Not to provide a lower standard or manner of service to a disabled 
person [section 19(1)(c)]

- To make ‘reasonable adjustments’ in circumstances in which the effect 
of that failure is to make it impossible or unreasonably difficult for the 
disabled person to make use of any such service [section 19(1)(b)]

Although operators of web sites are not specifically included within the 
definition of a ‘service provider’, a term left deliberately vague, it is 
likely they are liable. Indeed, it seems impossible to reasonably 
differentiate between the service provided by a conventional retailer and 
one who is based online.

As ‘information services’ are specifically included in section 19(3)(c), it 
is also arguable that all web sites are liable due to the internet being just 
that – an extremely large and varied information service. Whether rail 
timetables, Inland Revenue advice or a promotional site for the latest ad 
campaign, these are all sources of information.

The first duty imposed by the Act - "not to refuse to provide, or 
deliberately not provide a service" - could arguably apply where a 
service provider has deliberately chosen not to integrate accessibility into 
his web site. This might include where a Flash movie is used without an 
option to skip it, thus preventing people using screen readers to progress 
any further. Although some might argue this section is of limited 
application because knowledge is required on the part of the service 
provider, there is a duty to make reasonable inquiries under the code of 
practice that accompanies the Act.

The second duty - that of "standard of service" - prohibits service 
providers from providing a lower standard of service to a disabled 
person, compared to that offered to an able-bodied person. It is a 
straightforward argument that high street retailers offering innaccessible 
online shopping services are in breach of this rule.

The third, and perhaps most interesting of the relevant duties, is that of 
"reasonable adjustments". The issue of whether converting an 
inaccessible web site to an accessible web site was a reasonable 
adjustment to make has already been considered under similar legislation 
in Australia.

In the case of Maguire versus Sydney Organising Committee for the 
Olympic Games, the Australian Human Rights Commission 
(http://www.hreoc.gov.au) found in favour of the complainant, Bruce 
Maguire, that the committee had breached its duties as a service provider 
by providing an inaccessible web site (see E-Access Bulletin, May 
2001). The commission rejected SOCOG’s claims that introducing 
accessibility would be an unreasonable burden in terms of cost and 
manpower, instead favouring the complainant’s expert witnesses, who 
said compliance costs would be marginal. The commission also made 
reference to the World Wide Web Consortium's accessibility guidelines 
(http://www.w3c.org/wai), the first time these have been mentioned in a 
court of law, as a recognised set of guidelines that should be followed.

Although Australian cases are not regarded as authority in by the courts 
in the UK, there is no doubt that they can be considered persuasive in 
coming to decisions considering similar cases. This is especially so 
where the foreign legislation is similar to that in the UK (as is the case 
here with disability legislation) and when dealing with issues raised by 
new technology. It is therefore reasonable to expect that if and when an 
action is brought against a service provider in the UK that the courts will 
follow the lead set in SOCOG and expect service providers to comply 
with the W3C guidelines by providing an accessible site.

Service providers would therefore be well advised to follow the advice of 
the DDA code of practice, which obliges them to continually review their 
duties and take into account ‘technological developments [which] may 
provide new or better solutions to the problems of inaccessible services’ 
[paragraph 4.9]. This obligation is likely to be read as saying that: even if 
a web site was designed before the introduction of the WAI guidelines, 
they should still be adhered to as they are a new ‘standard’.

The accessibility cause is likely to be given fresh impetus by a new draft 
of the code of practice, to accompany the final part of the DDA which 
comes into force in 2004. This is currently before Parliament and is 
expected to contain more explicit references to web accessibility when it 
is published in final form in February. Not only will this act as a warning 
to service providers, but it is also likely to lead to increased awareness of 
rights amongst the disabled community. Combined, these factors should 
ensure accessibility will finally be given the recognition it deserves.

NOTE: This article is based on Martin Sloan's article 'Web accessibility 
and the DDA' which was published last year in the the Journal of 
Information, Law and Technology:
http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/01-2/sloan.html

[Section five ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You 
can 
list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please 
encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this 
copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-
accessibility.com is also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
