* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment.
Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute of the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid for screen readers, all headings begin with 
an asterisk and end with a full stop. All items are also now numbered 
in the contents and throughout the issue, with numbers appearing 
immediately after the asterisks. Please let us know if there is anything 
else we can do to make navigation easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 31, JULY 2002.

* CONTENTS:

Section one: News.
1: Digital watchdog needs sharper teeth
- public meeting on communications bill.
2: Disability guidelines for digital Ireland
- wide-ranging advice.
3: Small steps forward for digital radio
- new set is more affordable.
4: Test launch for 'A-sites'
- new portal picks best on the web.
5: Cinema audio description trials extended
- from Harry Potter to Spiderman.
6: Double money for audit scheme
- expansion for 'See it right'.

News in brief: 7: Non-profit copyright – access bill reaches Lords; 8: 
Low vision conference – July gathering in Gothenburg; 9: Learning 
process – online education; 10: Software talk – voice standards.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
- 11: Accessible code; 12: Library lowdown.

13: Special notice - Future Health Bulletin.

14: Section three: Preview - Sight Village 2002.
The largest technology show in the UK calendar opens next week. 
Derek Parkinson reports on what’s in store.

15: Special notice - writing competition.

16: Section four: Special report - accessible banking (part two).
- Money talks: Tamara Fletcher's two-part study of banking services 
turns to voice-enabled cash machines.

17: Section five: Opinion - social enterprise.
- Affordable access: what business model is best for an access 
technology developer? Roger Wilson-Hinds champions a cheaper 
way.

[Contents ends.]


* SECTION ONE: NEWS.

*1: DIGITAL WATCHDOG NEEDS SHARPER TEETH.

Proposed new digital communication regulations intended to 
safeguard the rights of users do not offer enough protection to 
visually impaired people, civil servants were told at a public meeting 
organised by the RNIB earlier this week. 

A draft Communications Bill
(http://www.communicationsbill.gov.uk/text_only/text_only.html), 
due in parliament before the end of the year, replaces regulators that 
previously oversaw TV, radio and telecoms services with Ofcom, a 
single watchdog which will be responsible for setting 
communications licence conditions and standards of service.

Officials from the Department of Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) 
and the Department of Trade and Industry were urged repeatedly by 
speakers from the floor to require digital TV broadcasters to increase 
their quotas of audio-described content and provide accessible 
electronic programme guides and set-top boxes. 

Concern was expressed that although providers of cable and satellite 
TV services will have to match levels of audio-described content 
provided by terrestrial broadcasters, these quotas will remain set at 
their current levels of 10 per cent. This compares with an 80 per cent 
requirement for subtitled content for the hearing impaired.

In a response which failed to spark much enthusiasm, Liz Ager of the 
DCMS confirmed the quota for audio descriptions will be kept under 
review. The RNIB confirmed afterwards to E-Access Bulletin that it 
will push for an immediate increase in the audio quota to 50 per cent.

Delegates were also concerned to learn that although Ofcom will have 
a duty to protect the interests of consumers, it will not have the power 
to make service providers offer accessible terminals.

“The distinction between being a service user and a user of terminal 
equipment doesn’t make sense,” said Sandy Bannister of the 
Worcestershire Association for the Blind. However, according to 
RNIB parliamentary officer Caroline Ellis, Ofcom could make it a 
requirement that service providers offer terminals which are 
compatible with assistive equipment. 

Readers can make formal responses to the draft bill until August 2 – 
email Fiona Murray on communicationsbill@dti.gsi.gov.uk


*2: DISABILITY GUIDELINES FOR DIGITAL IRELAND.

New accessibility guidelines for digital technologies have been 
published by the Irish National Disability Authority (NDA), the 
independent statutory body which oversees disability policy in 
Ireland.

The guidelines (http://accessit.nda.ie), which aim to be useful to 
people who make procurement decisions as well as technology 
developers, cover everything from web sites to public access 
terminals, telecoms terminals and application software.

The NDA says the initiative adds a new practical dimension to Irish 
national and European laws on accessibility, as they are based on 
close consultation with users and procurers. An innovative web-based 
interface to the document uses hypertext to lead the user through the 
guidelines according to who they are and what they are doing, and the 
web section annotates and explains often impenetrable international 
standards.

“Guidelines like those contained in the Web Accessibility Initiative 
(http://www.w3.org/WAI), are quite technical and difficult to 
understand if you are not a developer,” said project leader Christine 
Whyte.

According to Whyte, the project took just one year to get off the 
ground. The NDA was supported by an advisory board that included 
RNIB chief scientist Dr John Gill and commissioned a private sector 
partner (http://www.frontend.com) to conduct background research 
and draft the guidelines.


*3: SMALL STEPS FORWARD FOR DIGITAL RADIO.

The UK launch last week of a portable digital radio set at 99 pounds 
promises to make the medium much more affordable. But E-Access 
Bulletin has discovered that the set is only marginally more accessible 
to blind people than its more expensive predecessors.

Those in areas with a digital signal will be able to use the 'EVOKE-1' 
receiver from VideoLogic Systems (http://www.videologic.co.uk) to 
pick up the 50 or so free-to-air digital services from the BBC 
(http://www.bbc.co.uk/digitalradio) and commercial companies 
(http://www.ukdigitalradio.co.uk).

However, the set does not convert supplementary information about 
the content on air into voice output. With no verbal cue, blind users 
must select each channel to find out what it is and memorise the 
location for future reference.

VideoLogic told E-Access Bulletin this week there are, nevertheless, 
several design features of the set which may be useful to the blind, 
including its single raised and shaped control panel, and differing size 
and shape of its volume and tuning controls. Further improvements 
will be added to future models following discussions with the RNIB, 
a spokesperson said.

Whatever the design access issues, digital radio is still not the answer 
for everyone because signal coverage is not yet universal. Even in 
areas served by a digital transmitter, local geography can block the 
signal entirely, unlike analogue where reception varies on a sliding 
scale.

To check if you live in the 85 per cent of areas reached by 
commercial Digital One services you can enter your postcode at:
http://www.ukdigitalradio.co.uk/coverage/search/
And, to see if you are living in the 65 per cent of the country covered 
by BBC services, call 0870 010 0123


*4: TEST LAUNCH FOR 'A-SITES'.

A new online library of accessible web sites has been launched by the 
National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org).

The ‘A-sites’ portal (http://www.a-sites.org) has so far listed 153 
accessible sites under 40 different categories ranging from 
government to food and drink, with an accessibility rating for each 
and a facility for users to recommend other accessible sites.

Each site is user tested and assessed on a broad range of criteria 
including compatibility with magnification and audio software and 
Braille keyboards.

After an initial test phase, only sites which are 70 per cent or more 
accessible will be linked to the portal. So far just under half the sites 
tested make the grade. A cut-off of 80 per cent was tried initially, but 
the NLB had to lower the barrier when it found less than a third of 
sites complied.

The Canadian National Institute for the Blind (http://www.cnib.ca) 
currently earns the highest rating so far at 99 per cent. The producers 
hope to have found 1,000 A-sites by the portal's launch in October 
2002.


*5: CINEMA AUDIO DESCRIPTION TRIALS EXTENDED.

More films have been added to UK trials of a new system that makes 
cinema accessible to visually impaired people, delivering audio 
descriptions at adjustable volume through cordless headsets (See E-
Access Bulletin, January 2002).

Described films now include Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s 
Stone; Monsters Inc; Ocean's Eleven; Panic Room; Time Machine; 
Star Wars Episode II and Spiderman.

Participating cinemas are located in Belfast, Cardiff, Gateshead, 
Glasgow, Guildford, London, Pontypridd, Uxbridge and 
Wolverhampton.

At present, each of the 11 cinemas involved has only one screen with 
the trial equipment and only certain films have audio description. 
Cinema-goers are strongly advised to ring in advance to check that 
their film choice is being shown on the correct screen, and a small 
deposit may be required for the use of headphones. Contact details 
can be found at http://www.rnib.org.uk/broadcast/cinema.htm. 

E-Access Bulletin would welcome feedback from readers who have 
tried the system to email derek@headstar.com


*6: DOUBLE MONEY FOR AUDIT SCHEME.

The financial services group Standard Life has doubled its support for 
a free web site accessibility audit scheme - run as part of the RNIB’s 
‘See it right’ campaign – in response to high levels of applications to 
take part.

The company has raised its support for the scheme from a planned 
50,000 pounds in year one to 110,000 pounds, and supplied a second 
member of staff on secondment to the scheme to join an existing 
person already in position. 

Co-operative Bank Financial Advisers (http://www.cbfa.co.uk) is the 
first web site to successfully pass muster under the scheme, with a 
second organisation, the small Scottish internet service provider 
‘Echoraith’ (http://www.echoraith.net), due to be the second.

Under the scheme as originally planned free accessibility audits were 
to be offered to around 50 organisations a year for two years at an 
estimated cost of between 600 and 1,450 pounds per audit (see E-
Access Bulletin, February 2002). Anyone can apply but organisations 
to be audited are selected to represent a cross-section of sectors 
including retail, charity,  travel, education, utility and 
telecommunications, and government.

However after interest from over 200 organisations the extra funding 
has been pledged to allow a greater number to join in, with 76 audits 
already scheduled and 18 completed. The RNIB estimates that the 
cost of making the average site accessible following audit will be 
between one and two per cent of original design costs. For more on 
the audit scheme visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/digital/siraccess


* NEWS IN BRIEF.

*7: NON-PROFIT COPYRIGHT: The Copyright (Visually Impaired 
Persons) Bill has successfully completed its passage through the 
House of Commons and is expected to proceed through the Lords and 
pass into law by the end of October. The bill, a backbench measure 
which has gained government support, will legalise the limited non-
profit production of accessible digital versions of copyright material 
(see E-Access Bulletin, March 2002). The government has yet to 
name a timetable for subsequent introduction of the various sections 
of the bill but the RNIB is urging it to ensure full implementation by 
next Easter.

*8: LOW VISION CONFERENCE: Improving low vision 
access to the web, satellite-enabled urban navigation systems 
and e-learning's role in rehabilitation are among many the topics 
under the spotlight at the five day International Conference of 
Low Vision in Gothenberg, Sweden beginning on 21 July:
http://www.congrex.com/vision2002

*9: LEARNING PROCESS: A report on the accessibility of major 
online learning software packages has been published by Techdis, the 
disability technology information service for further and higher 
education. The report highlights the need to address accessibility 
issues in light of current UK legislation:
http://www.techdis.ac.uk/resources/VLE001.html

*10: SOFTWARE TALK: A 'Speech recognition grammar 
specification', allowing voice-based application authors to create 
rules describing what users are expected to say after listening to 
prompts, has ben released by the World Wide Web Consortium 
(http://www.w3.org/). According to the standards body, this will 
benefit people with visual impairments, and is the first of a series of 
voice-based software trials:
http://www.w3.org/TR/speech-grammar

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
 - Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

*11: MACHINE CODE: Samson Perera of the Sri Lanka Council for 
the Blind writes in to say: “I have been working with Windows for 
several years and I can manage almost any speech friendly program.

“Now I am very much interested in learning something about 
hardware, how to manage the Bios setup and also some languages, 
such as Java and C plus. I would appreciate it very much if anyone 
could let me know where I can purchase or borrow material in Braille, 
cassette or ASCII on these subjects.” [Responses to 
inbox@headstar.com].


*12: LIBRARY LOWDOWN: In our May issue Larry Johnson from 
Texas queried an apparent anomaly in the international library 
exchange system whereby his regional library for the blind cannot 
borrow from the UK National Library for the Blind.

Now Elaine Wilkinson of RNIB Library Services has further advice: 
“Although the RNIB is unable to lend directly to individuals overseas, 
you can request a library, university or organisation for the blind in 
your area to act as an intermediary on your behalf. Material (cassettes 
and some Braille) can then sent by inter-library loan in most cases. 
For further information please contact our Exports Department (email 
exports@rnib.org.uk).

The National Library for the Blind in the UK is also able to lend 
Braille to borrowers overseas, to individuals or organisations, in most 
cases. You will need to fill in a membership form. For further 
information contact National Library for the Blind (email 
enquiries@nlbuk.org).”

[Section two ends.]


*13: SPECIAL NOTICE - FUTURE HEALTH BULLETIN.

E-Access Bulletin’s sister publication Future Health Bulletin is a free 
independent monthly email newsletter on the use of new technologies 
in the health care sector. Its next issue will analyse news of a recent 
General Medical Council decision to ban a doctor from conducting 
consultations over the internet.

To subscribe to the plain text version of Future Health Bulletin send a 
blank email to:
fh-text-subscribe@headstar.com
and, for text with HTML attachment, email:
futurehealth-subscribe@headstar.com
For more information see:
http://www.headstar.com/futurehealth

[Special notice ends.]


*14: SECTION THREE: PREVIEW
- SIGHT VILLAGE 2002

PORTABLE NOTE-TAKERS SET FOR SEISMIC SHIFT.
by Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com

Exhibitors are busy gearing up for Sight Village 2002, the annual 
showcase for products and services for the visually impaired. The 
exhibition (http://www.qac.ac.uk/sight.htm) is free to visitors and will 
be held at the Queen Alexandra College, Birmingham from July 16-
18.

With more than 70 organisations setting out their stalls, visitors are 
sure to find something of interest, although a series of talks in the 
hospitality suite could grab most attention. Staff of Freedom 
Scientific (http://www.freedomscientific.com) will give daily 
presentations here, with overviews of features in the new JAWS 4.5 
screen reader and MAGic 8.0 screen magnifier, both due for release 
later this year.

Perhaps the most interesting presentation will deal with the 
company’s new 'PAC Mate' portable computer for visually impaired 
people. The PAC Mate range, based on Microsoft’s Pocket PC 
operating system, offers the functions of a Braille note-taker but is 
directly compatible with off-the-shelf Microsoft applications such as 
Word, Excel, Explorer and Outlook. 

According to Kevin Carey of the RNIB, products like PAC Mate 
should make communicating by email less error-prone. “The old way 
of converting Braille code for email meant that if I made a mistake 
typing, it would be almost impossible for my secretary to guess what I 
was trying to write,” he says. It should also eliminate the need for 
extra equipment.

“At the moment, if I go to a conference, take notes in Braille, but 
want to communicate with my secretary by email, I have to carry 
around 10 kilograms of stuff in my bag. With a stick in one hand it’s 
quite difficult to walk in a straight line – not good on station 
platforms,” he says. 

By contrast, the PAC Mate is expected to weigh considerably less – 
about two kilograms. According to Carey, the new release may be the 
start of a seismic shift for note-takers, with rival manufacturers forced 
to follow the same route to keep their share of the market.

Other interesting new developments for note-takers will  be 
demonstrated by Pulse Data 
(http://www.pulsedata.co.nz/index.cfm/11,html), with products 
designed to allow users of the firm's BrailleNote and VoiceNote 
hardware to browse the web easily and navigate using links to the 
Global Positioning System (GPS) network of satellites.

There will also be a fresh batch of screen reader innovations on show. 
Choice Technology (http://www.screenreader.co.uk) is previewing its 
DUAL screen reader, which can translate screen content and 
keystrokes into voice output, while an enlarger program magnifies 
selected portions of text (see also section five, this issue). DUAL is 
designed to be affordable at 120 pounds and flexible – voice and 
magnification can be selected independently with a single keystroke. 
The company will also be demonstrating WebbiE, an application 
developed at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and 
Technology that converts content from web pages into linear text.

Screen magnifiers get a useful set of new tweaks from Dolphin 
Computer Access. The company (http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk) has 
developed a set of customisation tools which can render screen 
colours in a mix chosen by the user and smooth magnified content, so 
even highly magnified text retains its sharpness and contrast.

Tactile interfaces will not be neglected. Duxbury Systems 
(http://www.duxburysystems.com) is flying over from the US to 
demonstrate DBT WIN 10.4, a product that converts mathematical 
notations, expressions and graphs into Braille output. Techno-Vision 
Systems (http://www.techno-vision.co.uk), a UK-based distributor of 
Duxbury products, is to demonstrate a Brailler that renders musical 
notation in UK standard formats. And Cheshire-based specialist 
Zychem (http://www.zychem-ltd.co.uk) will be demonstrating its 
latest tactile graphics products. 

Optical devices will also be showcased, with Low Vision Supplies 
(http://www.lowvisionsupplies.co.uk) keen to demonstrate its range 
of telescopic and filtering lenses for spectacles.

If visitors tire of investigating the products on show, they can always 
turn their attention to an impressive range of new services. The UK's 
Talking Newspapers Association (http://www.tnauk.org.uk) is 
particularly proud of its new Electronic Newsagent, which delivers 
magazines on disk, by email, CD-ROM or over the internet. There 
will be taped excerpts of 200 magazine titles available at the show.

Getting to and from the venue and navigating around the exhibition 
should be made easier by Describe Online, a provider of online text 
guides for cities, stations and venues. Visitors to Sight Village can 
find a practical demonstration of the service on the Describe Online 
web site, which has a text guide to the exhibition itself at
http://www.describe-online.com/sight-village/textguide.htm

Describe Online also provides text guides to parts of the National Rail 
network – including the main Birmingham stations – and the London 
Underground system (see E-Access Bulletin, February 2001).

[Section three ends.]


*15: SPECIAL NOTICE - WRITING COMPETITION.

E-Access Bulletin would like to remind readers wishing to enter our 
writing competition that the deadline is Friday 26 July.

First prize is a ‘Victor’ e-book reader worth more than 300 pounds 
donated by VisuAide (http://www.visuaide.com) while runners-up 
will each receive a set of 10 classic e-books on CD. Winners will also 
have their work published in the bulletin.

Entries should be between 500 and 800 words long and be on the 
theme "keeping in touch with technology". This could include online 
relationships, the pace of technological change, how technology has 
changed your life, or imagining what life could be like in the future. 
Entries to Phil Cain on phil@headstar.com

[Special notice ends.]


*16: SECTION FOUR: SPECIAL REPORT
- ACCESSIBLE BANKING (part two).

MONEY TALKS.
by Tamara Fletcher tamara@headstar.com

Although many UK banks are currently relaunching their internet 
services to improve accessibility (see E-Access Bulletin, June 2002), 
the accessible ATM (automatic teller machine) or ‘talking cash point’ 
has yet to appear in this country. Several other countries however, 
including Australia, Canada and the US, are much further ahead.

A talking ATM machine has a universal audio jack into which a 
standard personal stereo type earphone can be inserted to allow the 
user to listen to private instructions. The service talks the user through 
all standard transactions such as cash withdrawal or deposit, money 
transfer and checking an account balance. Visually impaired people 
are expected to carry their own earphones, although sometimes banks 
may keep some for general use.

In Australia, National Australia Bank is leading the way, with the first 
audio-enabled ATMs in place and a pledge to make all new machines 
audio-compatible from January 2003. 

In the US, regulations set out under the Americans with Disabilities 
Act have required that ATMs be independently usable by people with 
visual impairments since 1992, and there are now over 3,000 talking 
cash points across the country, with commitments from banks to 
install thousands more over the next few years.

And in Canada, the Royal Bank of Canada (http://www.royalbank.ca) 
installed its first audio ATM in October 1997 and has a total of 14 
expanding to 250 nationwide by September.

Kirk Reiser, who has been blind since the age of 11, is a frequent user 
of RBC’s teller machines. He is also an experienced user of all kinds 
of technology, being a network administrator at the University of 
Western Ontario and the author of ‘Speakup’, the leading screen 
reader for the Gnu/Linux operating system (http://www.linux-
speakup.org).

Reiser says Royal Bank of Canada services do have good general 
accessibility, including a Braille accounts billing system, but there are 
occasional difficulties with the ATMs caused by the smallest of 
changes.

“Most ATMs are slightly different from each other in the ways they 
are laid out. So because I've sort of mastered one it leaves me still 
unable to access others. Even the one I use changed it's interface 
slightly recently which made me have to have someone go over its 
options and menus again to learn to use its new arrangement.

“They put in a new timed option to cancel or enter a new transaction 
which left me thinking the machine wasn't working for about two 
weeks because I was hitting cancel when I thought I was entering 
end-of-transactions. It's really irritating because now I have to count 
to five or six before pressing the button and if I'm not right then I 
have to go through the entire operation again, which doesn't make 
folks behind me in line very happy!

“Another frustrating thing about the new interface is that when I do 
hit end-of-transactions it spits out my card, the receipt and the money 
immediately and simultaneously making it difficult to grab everything 
at once.”

Meanwhile in the UK, while no banks have yet introduced accessible 
ATMs, almost all are investigating the options, not least because in 
2004, banks will have to comply with a new code of practice under 
the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) requiring them to make 
“reasonable adjustments” to their premises to overcome physical 
barriers to access.

The Centre for Accessible Environments (http://www.cae.org.uk), a 
charity which promotes discussion of accessible design issues, is 
currently working closely with a number of banks and building 
societies on accessibility of ATMs.

The centre has also published ATM guidelines which recommend 
“more emphasis….on tactile and audio feedback, speech output, the 
avoidance of screen reflections, and innovative interface design that 
makes less demand on visual capacity”.

Installing upgrades or new machines can be an expensive business, 
however, according to Alan Looney, director of terminals engineering 
at global ATM suppliers Diebold (http://www.diebold.com).

“The premium for a new ATM to be capable of voice guidance is 
typically hundreds of pounds, but the real cost is upgrading the entire 
infrastructure that the ATMs are tied into,” Looney says. “This 
typically costs in the tens or hundreds of thousands of pounds to 
implement, depending on the age, complexity and size of the network 
and its host system.”

Most of the large UK banking groups run networks of several 
thousand ATMs, so the cost of full audio compliance will not be 
trivial. But with the new DDA provisions looming the banks may 
have little choice but to stump up.

[Section four ends.]


*17: SECTION FIVE: OPINION
- SOCIAL ENTERPRISE.

AFFORDABLE ACCESS.
by Roger Wilson-Hinds  info@screenreader.co.uk

There are two dominant business models in operation in the field of 
access technology: the pure business model and the charitable model.

In the pure business model, talented and dedicated individuals form a 
small company which generally uses borrowed cash to expand their 
business to reach their scattered, minority client group. There are 
several examples of technology resulting from this model, including 
the well-known JAWS, HAL and Window Eyes screen readers. On 
the surface at least, it seems to work well for everyone, satisfying the 
needs of entrepreneur, investor and customer.

Only not everyone does actually benefit, because the high cost of 
research and the need to reward investors for the high risks they take 
result in a high price to the consumer. Prices are so high in fact, that 
many cannot join in the game. Many visually impaired people often 
find it hard to afford the price of computers let alone the 600 pound 
price for software and 400 pounds a day for training.

As a result, it is generally the same small group of employed, funded 
or well-educated clients who receive the latest commercially built 
screenreaders and the fastest PCs. Meanwhile the majority of people 
who could benefit from screen readers - around 80 per cent of 
visually impaired people - remain unable to afford these systems.

So to the charitable model, built around the talent and enterprise of 
major charities like the RNIB. This has brought many useful products 
to the market, perhaps the best example being the digital talking book 
project.  In the case of access technology, most of the large charitable 
organisations also provide the necessary assessment, training and 
advice. Again it seems like everyone's a winner.

But delivering major projects like talking books requires long 
development periods and large capital outlay to employ a highly 
skilled development team for a number of years. Again this system 
does not benefit everyone, because charities like businesses are forced 
to meet their costs. To do so they must focus their efforts on serving 
initiatives of well-funded government departments or large 
companies. Here again, it is those with low or no budgets who often 
miss out.

Given the failings of both the pure business model and the charitable 
model, the social business model offers the best way to aid 
disadvantaged groups within society. Using this approach a group of 
blind people decide what they want and enablers invest in and 
develop the thoughts of the group. A social enterprise like this is free 
from both the commands of government and the profit motive.

Early ventures have mainly been centrally or regionally organised for 
the benefit of the client group. But we are now learning that the best 
results emerge when the model is focused on a bottom up approach 
from within the community itself. This way everyone feels ownership 
of the project and within the community the necessary team talents 
can be encouraged by investment in training.

We believe that by using this approach Choice Technologies' 
LookOUT screenreader (http://www.screenreader.co.uk) can benefit 
even those on very low income. There are plenty of obstacles in our 
way, not least the large group of developers, assessors, trainers who 
make their living from selling or supporting expensive commercial 
software. Nevertheless, we will stick with the social enterprise model 
and keep selling our screen reader at 80 pounds. Many in the blind 
community simply cannot afford the alternatives.

NOTE: Roger Wilson-Hinds is a founder of Choice Technology, 
which has for 10 years delivered workplace computer access training. 
He is currently studying at the School of Social Entrepreneurs 
(http://www.sse.org.uk/network)

[Section five ends.]


* HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject 
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be 
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access 
bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

* PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

[Issue ends.]
