* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment.
Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute of the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid to those using screen readers, all headings 
begin with an asterisk and end with a full stop. Please let us know if 
there is anything else we could do to make navigation of the bulletin 
easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 30, JUNE 2002.

* CONTENTS:

News:
- Concerns over new anti-discrimination body.
- UK launch for accessible laptop.
- Europe backs common design standards.
- 'Cynthia' interprets the web.
- Techshare 2002: learning and work.

News in brief: iCan do - online consumer survey; Finger panic - free 
accessible games; Bright threads - RNIB fundraiser; On the ball - 
World Cup site.

Section two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' forum.

Section three: Profile - talking newspapers.
- All the news that's fit to email: the UK talking newspaper 
association has moved from audio tapes to a high-tech service that 
could represent the future of news for everyone.

Section four: Special report – accessible banking.
- Usability on trial: Tamara Fletcher charts the patchy progress made 
by high street banks towards accessible online services.

Section five: Trade secrets – keyboard shortcuts.
- Basic computer survival skills from John Wilson.

[Contents ends.]


*SECTION ONE: NEWS.


* CONCERNS OVER NEW ANTI-DISCRIMINATION BODY.

Government plans to set up a single new anti-discrimination 
commission, replacing three existing agencies, could make disability 
laws more difficult to implement, the RNIB has warned.

The scheme, announced to Parliament last month by Home Office 
minister Barbara Roche (http://fastlink.headstar.com/anti), proposes 
to replace the Equal Opportunities Commission, Commission for 
Racial Equality and Disability Rights Commission with a single body 
that would also cover discrimination on the grounds of age, sexual 
orientation and religion.

However, the RNIB fears the new body would lack focus, which 
could jeopardise the effective introduction of new laws covering 
disability, with key parts of the Disability Discrimination Act and the 
Special Educational Needs and Discrimination Act being phased in 
over the next few years.

“It’s important that there’s a body focusing uniquely on disability, 
providing advice and consultation to employers and schools, for 
example, as each part of an act comes in,” Steve Winyard of the 
RNIB told E-Access Bulletin this week.

The government aims to report findings this autumn, but according to 
Roche, any major changes are unlikely in the short-term. “I would not 
expect any new structures to be operative in the lifetime of this 
Parliament,” she said.


* UK LAUNCH FOR ACCESSIBLE LAPTOP.

LapTalk, a laptop computer with integrated screenreader designed 
specifically for visually impaired users, is expected to launch in the 
UK later this summer.

The product, developed by US company Beyond Sight 
(http://www.beyondsight.com), will be around the same size and 
weight as a conventional laptop computer and has the Window-Eyes 
screenreader built in.

LapTalk will run the Windows XP operating system, provide internet 
access through a built-in modem or network port, and offer full 
versions of Microsoft's Internet Explorer web browser and Outlook 
Express email software. Microsoft-compatible word processor, 
spreadsheet and database applications are also planned.

If it lives up to its maufacturer's claims, LapTalk could replace the 
combination of note-taker and computer to which visually impaired 
users have grown accustomed, at around half the cost. Beyond Sight 
is also expected to launch DeskTalk, a desktop version of the 
computer. Both machines will include a connector for screens, 
allowing visually impaired users to share information with sighted 
users.


* EUROPE BACKS COMMON DESIGN STANDARDS.

European Union members will have to adopt common standards for 
the design of public sector web sites by 2003, making them easy to 
access by users with disabilities, under new laws set to be passed by 
the European Parliament.

The parliament debated a report yesterday on a common design 
framework (http://fastlink.headstar.com/ep) that will eventually form 
the basis of a Council Resolution. The resolution will also establish 
independent national bodies to handle complaints about inaccessible 
web sites.

The report, compiled by the Parliament Industry Committee, also 
reviewed the progress by member states in reaching accessibility 
targets already laid out in the EU's 'eEurope 2002' information 
society action plan. In particular, the committee recommended that 
government, health and education web sites include speech 
technologies that allow navigation by voice commands.

In addition, the report found that while all web sites use standards-
based technologies like XML in their construction, they do so in 
different ways, noting: “That is particularly problematic for disabled 
with special navigation apparatus.”

Meanwhile the European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
(http://www.etsi.org), has released a first draft of a standard that will 
define computer speech commands for all major European languages, 
making multilingual speech recognition technology more viable for a 
wide range of devices:
http://portal.etsi.org/HF/STFs/STF182.asp


* 'CYNTHIA' INTERPRETS THE WEB.

A web navigator with a built-in 'interpreter' that produces voice 
descriptions of web content is being developed by Paris-based 
technology company Daumas Informatique (http://www.daumas-
informatique.fr).

'Cynthia' is designed to present web content to users in large, bright, 
customisable text formats accompanied by descriptions in English, 
French or German, in male or female voices.

According to its manufacturer, the technology can interpret pictures 
where a web designer has included a description in HTML. It is also 
designed to reveal some of the structure of a web site, such as 
numbers of pages and links, and short descriptions of their functions. 
Cynthia can also produce flexible voice responses, with louder output 
indicating titles of documents and lower volumes for body text, for 
example.

The browser's VoiceXML technology is designed to be compatible 
with all Unix, Mac and PC operating systems.

Daumas has also produced a small handheld device with Braille-
tagged keys, 'LISON', that speaks currency conversions to and from 
the euro. For more information on both these projects email:
info@daumas-informatique.fr


* TECHSHARE 2002 – LEARNING AND WORK.

Learning, work and the rise of a digital society are to be the three key 
themes at this year's Techshare, the RNIB's annual conference on 
technology for visually impaired people.

The event's organisers have issued a call for papers, and in the 
learning category, are keen to cover e-learning, computer training and 
regulation. The work theme covers procurement, standards, training 
and ways of working, while digital society topics include mobile 
phones, internet voting, digital television and e-books, together with 
the perennial issue of web accessibility.

The conference will take place on 21-22 November at the 
International Convention Centre, Birmingham. To submit a paper 
online visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare/paperform.htm


* NEWS IN BRIEF:

* iCAN DO: The US-based disability portal iCan 
(http://www.ican.com) has launched a consumer survey aiming to 
improve product development and consumer services for people with 
disabilities. To participate in the survey, which focuses on computers, 
travel, media and vehicles, visit:
http://www.ican.com/research.cfm?irs=ib1

* FINGER PANIC: Accessible gaming company BSC has released 
two free games. Score points avoiding your computer opponent with 
‘Deekout’ http://www.bscgames.com/deek.asp and search for the 
‘crackerjack’ in ‘Finger Panic’:
http://www.bscgames.com/finger.asp

* BRIGHT THREADS: The RNIB is launching a viral email 
campaign today to encourage people to dig out their gaudiest clothes 
for its annual fundraising event, LookLoud. Users will be able to 
dress a virtual doll in loud clothes and email the result onto a friend:
http://www.lookloud.co.uk

* ON THE BALL: A new web site aims to offer live text coverage of 
all football World Cup matches from 15 June. User feedback is 
encouraged:
http://www.enableall.org

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO - 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com 

* HOME ENTERTAINMENT: Bulletin reader Paul Schomburg is 
seeking information on accessibility of the new Multimedia Home 
Platform interactive television standard (MHP - http://www.mhp.org) 
developed by the industry consortium Digital Video Broadcasting 
(DVB – http://www.dvb.org).

He says: “As much interactive TV will be in a textual format 
(including XML-based formats), I am looking for information on 
accessibility tools for MHP development. If interactive TV is 
launched without accessibility then many blind users will be unable to 
participate.

“In the US recently the cable industry research consortium CableLabs 
introduced a series of ‘OpenCable’ specifications based on MHP, but 
apparently without accessibility tools (see 
http://www.opencable.com/specifications.html). The OpenCable 
application platform specification OCAP 1.0 defines a Java based 
execution environment, while OCAP 2.0 adds content formats based 
on web technologies such as XML.

“Any information on the European situation, or pointers to relevant 
discussion forums, would be appreciated.” [Responses to 
inbox@headstar.com]


* ONE-WAY TRAFFIC: In our last issue Larry Johnson from Texas 
queried an apparent anomaly in the international library exchange 
system whereby his regional library for the blind cannot borrow from 
the UK National Library for the Blind, despite these resources being 
listed in international catalogues.

Mrs Chris McMillan, a regular correspondent of ours from the US, 
confirms: “The answer Larry has been given is correct. The National 
Library for the Blind has a system which gives Canada and the UK 
readers access to both libraries but at present that’s as far as it goes. I 
believe there are discussions under way with other English speaking 
countries to extend this system though.

“I should point out that the National Library for the Blind in the UK 
only deals with material in Braille. Anything to do with audio would 
be a separate issue entirely. The RNIB supplies us with both Braille 
and audio material.”


* SHOP SMART: Several readers sent in advice following last 
month’s appeal from David Porter on behalf of a friend of his with 
tunnel vision, for information on gadgets to help her avoid bumping 
into people when shopping in a supermarket and also when 
swimming in a pool.

Chris McMillan says: “Over the years there have been electronic 
warning or guidance devices, but they've been so expensive that 
they've never caught on. I haven't heard of anything in the UK for 
some years now.”

She also has visually impaired friends who swim and says they either 
swim with sighted help or swim when ‘lanes’ are in use. “Growing up 
in a partially sighted school, we learned to swim without bumping 
into each other, and some of my schoolmates have gone on to become 
Olympic winners!”

Rod Carne, chief executive of the National Blind Children's Society, 
also has low-tech advice: “I walk in front of the shopping trolley and 
find this reduces accidents. If you are not hellbent on being 
independent the stores usually fall over themselves to provide an 
assistant to help you.

On swimming he says: “I crack this problem by using my local pool 
when they have lane swimming. I can at most times locate the black 
line on the bottom of the pool which fortunately is midway between 
the barrier ropes. Prior to this they would always put in a lane for me 
when it was not busy.

“I consider that you have a case for this sort of concession under the 
Disability Discrimination Act. If you cannot get anywhere with your 
local pool, try writing to the chief executive of the local council, or I 
could try negotiating for you.”

Larry Johnson says: “To deal with the problem in the pool, she might 
swim with a buddy along side to alert her about other swimmers or 
obstacles. Another technique, one which I follow, is to swim along 
the side of the pool touching it from time to time to keep position. A 
third alternative is to choose to swim at a time when there are fewer 
swimmers. None of these are perfect solutions, but they work.”

[Section two ends.]


* SECTION THREE: PROFILE
- TALKING NEWSPAPERS.

* ALL THE NEWS THAT'S FIT TO EMAIL.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

There are now many up to date news services available on the 
internet, much of it accessible to visually impaired people. 
Nevertheless, the bulk of the information appearing in the latest 
newspapers and magazines in your local newsagent is still not online.

Up until now this problem has been tackled by sighted people 
volunteering to reading the publications onto tape – the ‘talking 
newspaper’. From the beginnings of this work in the early 1970s the 
UK has become home to the world's most extensive network of 
volunteer newspaper readers, made up of some 520 local groups, 430 
of which are affiliated to the Talking Newpaper Association UK 
(TNAUK - http://www.tnauk.org.uk).

Overall, the national network delivers around 1,100 of the UK's 1,500 
local newspapers, to an audience of 200,000 visually impaired people. 
TNAUK, based on a small industrial estate in Heathfield, East 
Sussex, is also responsible for voicing the UK's national newspapers 
and around 200 magazines and newsletters in its eight on-site studios.

Though popular, the tape transcription method does have its 
drawbacks. The biggest problem is that the process is extremely 
labour intensive, with the Sunday Times alone taking around 30 hours 
to read from front to back. When this time is added to that needed to 
copy and deliver the tapes, it means a timely service is nigh-on 
impossible without cutting corners. And, when it comes to factual 
information, there is a fine line between cutting corners and 
censorship. In TNAUK chief executive Tim McDonald's point of 
view, "There should be a right to access newspapers and books under 
the Disability Discrimination Act."

Now however, new software tools and internet-based delivery 
methods are revolutionising the service, so much so that is sometimes 
now even faster than delivery of the paper version. Using automated 
text editing machines and email delivery TNAUK now delivers the 
complete text of newspapers to visually impaired people hours before 
they arrive at the newsagents. On a good day, TNAUK says a 
newspaper will be on the subscriber's electronic doormat by 4.30am.

Publishers play their part in the digital supply chain by sending the 
raw copy of their newspapers to the association in Quark or 
PageMaker desktop publishing formats. To do so is an act of trust, 
with publishers wary of piracy, but McDonald says they can rest easy: 
"We will fight piracy as hard as anyone.”

TNAUK's electronic catalogue doesn't stop with the national papers, 
offering subscribers around 200 other magazines and newsletters 
electronically. According to TNAUK programmer Ian McGregor, 
"These types of publications offer considerable challenges in their 
‘standard’ form for visually impaired people. They are difficult and 
often impossible to read, even with a strong magnifier. The pages are 
often printed in many colours on glossy paper, and text is sometimes 
superimposed over images."

Other tasks which need to be carried out before a publication can be 
despatched include the substitution of contractions for full words and 
linear text for tables, a particular favourite of consumer titles like 
Computer Shopper. "The biggest difficulty we have here is the rather 
slack standards of composition," says McGregor. "A lot of people 
don't know the difference between 'soft' carriage returns and 'hard' 
carriage returns. Nobody takes into account what we have to do later 
on."

Despite its advantages, TNAUK’s digital subscription rates remain 
low, with only 10 percent of the association’s 20,000 or so 
subscribers choosing this format. TNAUK's head of IT Tony Dart 
explains the low uptake on the fact that visually impaired people tend 
to be older and so are less likely to be familiar with computers.

For people who prefer the human voice, TNAUK is committed to 
continuing with the tape format. But even this trusty format is due to 
get a high tech facelift, with the studios due to digitise this year.

Ultimately, these high-tech developments for the visually impaired 
could even come full circle and end up teaching the sighted a thing or 
two. To Tim McDonald, email delivery is the future of news for 
everybody, and the techniques being developed by TNAUK could 
lead the way.

NOTE: For more information about subscribing to TNAUK 
publications email info@tnauk.org.uk

[Section three ends.]


* SECTION FOUR: SPECIAL REPORT
- ACCESSIBLE BANKING (Part One).

* USABILITY ON TRIAL.
by Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

Online banking is often one of the first ways in which people start to 
gain confidence in using the internet for everyday transactions, but for 
those with visual impairment it has not been so easy.

In September 2000, the RNIB tested the accessibility of web sites of 
17 well-known high street businesses, including four banks: Abbey 
National, Alliance and Leicester, HSBC and NatWest. Of these four, 
none passed all the basic tests set for them, and one (who was 
generously allowed to remain anonymous) did not pass any.

Last year even more extensive usability testing took place at six banks 
and a follow-up report, 'Accessible e-banking', was published in 
October 2001 by the RNIB with the British Banking Association, 
ahead of a conference in April.

The conference heard of a situation which is fast improving, but still 
with some way to go before internet banking becomes fully 
accessible. Joe Norburn, head of the web team that runs Natwest.com 
and its parent company's site Royal Bank of Scotland 
(http://www.rbs.co.uk), said he would not consider using an agency 
that had could not understand how to make web sites accessible, not 
least because of the obligations for accessible digital services implied 
by the Disability Discrimination Act.

He advised developers to incorporate accessibility from the start of a 
project as it is more difficult to retrofit an existing site and underlined 
the importance of user testing while addressing the misconception 
that to make a web site accessible is to make the user experience less 
compelling – saying that it is possible to push the boundaries of 
design while still complying with accessibility guidelines.

Abbey National recently relaunched its e-banking service 
(http://www.abbeynational.co.uk/ebanking_home.htm) and is 
currently working on a text only version of their site, which may be 
available later this year. A spokesman for the bank said: “RNIB had 
been quite verbal about our previous web site. At the end of January 
we relaunched it and are committed to further improvements. We sit 
in the office and use the Jaws browser with it so we’re confident with 
it.”

Nationwide (http://www.nationwide.co.uk) is also making progress. 
One employee at the building society told E-Access Bulletin: “We’re 
making our pages more accessible generally. Parts of the site are 
already compliant, for example banking, credit cards, investment and 
pensions, but the home page is still very inaccessible – so the front 
door hasn’t been addressed but the hallway has.”

The online banking parts of the site are due to be relaunched soon, 
and the bank says during the development process of the new site 
they have learned much more about accessibility issues and will 
continue work to improve it.

One bank customer and experienced internet user who has been in 
communication with the RNIB about accessibility problems is Ian 
Dawson, who has been totally blind since 17, and has accounts with 
Nationwide and NatWest. He says he lost his original registration 
with the NatWest web site through problems logging on, and hasn’t 
been able to reregister since.

“Each bank has different security processes - with Nationwide, the 
log on process is relatively straightforward. You have a customer 
number, choice of password and a pass number. With NatWest 
there’s a random element to it – you have a user number uniquely 
identifiable to you, then they ask for three letters from your password. 
Using a screen-reader, you have a limited time to do this but it also 
depends much on which screen-reader you use.”

The RNIB/British Banking Association report highlights a series of 
other key features of accessible banking:

- Make logging in straightforward - make login link one of the first to 
be accessed within the tab order. When login process has a number of 
stages, use the word ‘continue’ rather than ‘send’ or ‘confirm’. Make 
sure user is made aware of any new browser windows.

- Keep it simple - terminology should be unambiguous. Provide a link 
to a list of abbreviations, if used. Error messages should be concise 
and give the user an indication of what to do next.

- Use tables correctly and consider how they might be read.

- Provide help and clear messages on screen and ensure that 
navigation round the site is reasonable - forms can be particularly 
confusing at first as the whole page is not visible.

- Lay out statements clearly - make sure credit and debit amounts are 
easily distinguishable.

- Keep users informed when logging out, and provide a link to log 
back in.

NOTE: Next month we look at the accessibility of ATM cash 
machines. 'Accessible e-banking' is available from the BBA in print, 
audio and Braille formats for 80 pounds - email 
publications@bba.org.uk

[Section four ends.]


* SECTION FIVE: TRADE SECRETS
- KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS.

* THE KEYS TO TAMING THE METAL BOX.
By John Wilson  jwjw@onetel.net.uk

I have been using computers for over ten years now, but I well 
remember some of the frustrations and seeming impossibilities I faced 
when I first started. Nevertheless, having grasped the essentials of 
using keyboard shortcuts, screenreaders and Braille displays, a blind 
person can quite rapidly turn a frustrating metal box into a very 
helpful and life-enriching aid and companion.

There are special programs written for blind people designed to be 
easy to use from the keyboard only. But the reality is that, both at 
home and at work, visually impaired people need to learn to use the 
same programs as their sighted counterparts. For visually impaired 
people this means learning to use keyboard shortcuts. There can be 
considerable differences between programs in how easily this can be 
done, with some having few or no 'hot keys'. But the main problem 
for visually impaired people is often obtaining meaningful feedback 
to check you have achieved your goal, not using the keyboard or 
remembering the hot keys.

Fortunately most Windows-based programs come with a enough 
keyboard shortcuts and a good screenreader will let you know if you 
have succeeded. But still, for the beginner, learning how to use some 
of these massive programs - such as the MS Word processor, the 
Sound Forge audio system, or Nero-Burner CD copying software - 
can be a daunting prospect.

This is where good quality training or good text and tape tutorials 
tailored specifically to the needs of visually impaired users is crucial. 
With the best will in the world, a sighted trainer of sighted people 
using sighted methods often cannot grasp how a blind person must 
use alternative methods to achieving their goal and verify the results.

I remember the difficulties I had years ago learning to use the DOS 
DataEase database manager with a sighted trainer alongside sighted 
colleagues. One problem the trainer had no answer for was the 
difficulty I had reading the tables the program produced. Once 
halfway down a page, the table's contents disassociated from their 
heading. I later discovered that DataEase reports can be created in a 
variety of formats, including one in line by line format, which meant 
reading and understanding the report file was much easier than in 
columns. 

When using mainstream software such as Microsoft Word, Excel, 
WordPerfect, TextBridge Millennium, Sound Forge or the main web 
browsers, it is more important to learn the general shortcut keystrokes 
and hot keys embedded in Windows programs than learn the hot keys 
of your screenreader.

By becoming dependent on the special keystrokes of a particular 
screenreader, you could find yourself unable to operate a machine 
with a different screenreader on it. For example shortcuts such as 
Control + O to open a file, Control + P to print, Windows key + M to 
go to the desktop, Tab and Shift + Tab to move through web page 
elements, will work on most Microsoft software and packages 
following Windows conventions. 

This said, it is useful to learn the keystroke shortcuts built into their 
screenreader where Windows does not have equivalents. For 
example, with the Window Eyes screenreader, Insert + S reveals the 
System Tray; with the JAWS screenreader, Shift + Insert + Down 
arrow tells you what has been highlighted; and with HAL, Control + 9 
switches between column-reading and line-reading modes.

I would recommend the use of a modern Windows-based computer, 
together with a printer and print scanner, with a speech, Braille or 
magnification system, to anyone who has a need to read their own 
literature and a desire to be as independent as possible. They must be 
aware though, before they buy a computer, that it will require a 
considerable investment of their time and effort to become proficient, 
but the results will be well worthwhile.

NOTE: John Wilson is author of the 'From the keyboard' series of 
tutorials for visually impaired people. For more details call 0113 
2575957 or visit:
http://web.onetel.net.uk/~fromthekeyboard

[Section five ends.]


* HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject 
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be 
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access 
bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

* PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News Editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
