* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute of the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid to those using screen readers, all headings 
begin with an asterisk and end with a full stop. Please let us know if 
there is anything else we could do to make navigation of the bulletin
easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 29, MAY 2002.

* CONTENTS:

News:
- Multimedia boost for Braille.
- Objections raised over e-voting trial.
- Local government site receives access award.
- Competition – win an e-book reader.
- Shopping by voice with the Freedom Network.

News in brief: Internet Society opens disability chapter; How to find 
accessible e-books; Accessible law. 

Section two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' forum.

Section three: On site
- St Dunstan’s (part one). The charity has been rehabilitating blind ex-
service people since the First World War. Dan Jellinek finds that 
many veterans are as keen to use the internet as new recruits.

Section four: A reader writes
- St Dunstan’s (part two): a soldier’s story. Mark Threadgold served 
17 years in the Royal Corps of Signals until losing his sight in an 
accident. He tells how two years at St Dunstan’s have opened up new 
opportunities – and challenges.

Section five: Focus
- Speech technology: the voice web is widely touted as the interface of 
the future, and not just for blind people. Judith Markowitz assesses the 
state of the art.

[Contents ends.]


*SECTION ONE: NEWS


* MULTIMEDIA TO THE RESCUE OF BRAILLE?

Blind children should be taught Braille in a rich multimedia 
environment, an international group of experts concluded at a 
conference held in Copenhagen last month.

The symposium, entitled ‘Braille in the age of digitisation’ 
(http://www.ibos.dk/braille), was convened to examine how digital 
technologies could be harnessed to reverse the declining use of 
Braille. According to a study by the US National Federation of the 
Blind, Braille literacy levels in both the US and UK have fallen from 
more than 50 per cent 40 years ago to less than 10 per cent now 
(http://www.nfb.org/braille/brustoc.htm).

RNIB vice chairman Kevin Carey, who representated the institute in 
Copenhagen, said the internet has an important role to play in 
stimulating the uptake of Braille. “One of the reasons that children are 
keen to read print is to gain access to what is forbidden, but Braille 
content is almost entirely prescribed, so they lose interest,” he said.

Delegates also passed a resolution to encourage Braille production 
houses to pool their resources to form a unified Braille research 
laboratory. The unified body, they said, should aim to develop 
affordable tools that can render internet content in both standard and 
advanced Braille grades. Carey said the common policy of 
encouraging people to learn the sophisticated grade two Braille 
irrespective of their needs has not helped: “Learning grade two is 
hard: blind people have enough problems anyway, and many will 
think - why add one more?”

The conference agreed, however, that the unified approach would 
have limits, and that specialist Braille notations needed for 
mathematics, music and engineering should continue to be produced 
by specialist production houses.


* OBJECTIONS RAISED OVER E-VOTING TRIAL.

Objections have been raised about the inaccessibility of one of the 
electronic voting trials held alongside this month’s local council 
elections.

The Department of Transport, Local Government and the Regions 
held a series of e-voting pilots in nine local authority areas in England 
- Bolton, Chester, Borough of Crewe and Nantwich, Liverpool, 
Newham, Sheffield, St Albans, Stratford upon Avon and Swindon. 
The trials included internet voting from home, voting kiosks and 
mobile text messaging.

In Sheffield, 36 per cent of those who voted did so electronically 
through the Sheffield e-Vote 2002 gateway 
(http://www.votesheffield.com). However Julian Scarlett, web design 
officer for the education department at Sheffield which was not 
involved in the pilot, told the international Web Accessibility 
Initiative (WAI – http://www.w3.org/WAI) email list this month: 
“Although I applaud the project [for] those who find traditional voting 
methods hard to access, I am dismayed at the accessibility of the site; 
no alt text, no table summaries, no natural language declaration for 
body text, no labels for form elements, absolute font sizes”.

The Sheffield trial was run with private sector partners BT and 
Election.com. Charel Aoun, technical director of Election.com, 
admitted that the web gateway used to access the online voting system 
wasn’t run through the standard accessibility checker, Bobby as there 
was no time. However, he told E-Access Bulletin that the voting 
engine itself was accessible. “The engine conforms with WAI 
guidelines up to level 3 – in this pilot we missed a couple of details 
but it definitely is level 2. The project was a pilot and we’ll take on 
board any glitches and work to improve them in future.”

Meanwhile disability organisation Scope (http://www.scope.org.uk) is 
calling for feedback on the accessibility of the postal ballot or e-voting 
pilots during the local elections for a report commissioned by the 
Electoral Commission. For a survey form or more information call 
020 7619 7252/3 or email campaigns@scope.org.uk


* LOCAL GOVERNMENT SITE WINS ‘SEE IT RIGHT’ AWARD.

IDeA Knowledge (http://www.idea.gov.uk/knowledge), a web portal 
on e-government in the UK developed by the local government 
Improvement and Development Agency (IDeA), is the first local 
government site to pass an audit for the RNIB ‘See It Right’ web 
accessibility campaign. The central government portal UK Online 
(http://www.ukonline.gov.uk) has already qualified for an award.

The IDeA Knowledge site aims to share insights and practices with 
policy makers and practitioners in local government through 
workshops, toolkits, case studies and online communities. According 
to IDeA, the site now sets a standard for accessibility that local 
authorities should try to emulate.

Although IDeA cannot impose accessibility standards, it warns that 
local authorities cannot ignore them. “If they do they’re going to be in 
trouble: if some local authorities are seen to be coasting or doing 
badly while others are doing well, people will start asking questions,” 
an agency spokesperson told E-Access Bulletin.

According to the RNIB, the ‘See It Right’ campaign is a major step 
forward because awards for web sites are based on an independent 
human audit, unlike software-based approaches like Bobby 
(http://www.cast.org/bobby), or World Wide Web Consortium 
guidelines, which provide a set of standards for accessibility, but no 
checks on compliance. To date, the RNIB has only audited a handful 
of sites, but expects to deal with a further 50 sites from across the 
private and public sectors in the next six months.

The RNIB says projects like the London-based Accessible and 
Personalised Local Authority Websites initiative (APLAWS - 
http://www.aplaws.org.uk) represent the next important step in 
making government web sites more accessible to visually impaired 
people. APLAWS is run by a consortium of councils developing a 
content management system that will standardise the way content is 
laid out and navigated on council web sites.


* WRITING COMPETITION - WIN AN E-BOOK READER.

E-Access Bulletin is offering blind or visually impaired writers the 
chance to win the latest in e-book reading hardware and software.

First prize in our writing competition is a ‘Victor’ e-book reader worth 
more than 300 pounds donated by VisuAide 
(http://www.visuaide.com). Victor reads a new kind of CD talking 
book which allows for fast, easy navigation (for a review see
E-Access Bulletin, March 2002). Runners-up will each receive a set of 
10 classic e-books on CD worth around 100 pounds. Winners will also 
be published in a future issue of the bulletin - now with 3,000 readers 
worldwide and translated into five languages!

Entries should be between 500 and 800 words long and address the 
theme "keeping in touch with technology". The topic could cover 
online relationships, the pace of technological change, how 
technology has changed your life, or imagining what life could be like 
in the future.

The closing date is Friday 26 July 2002 and the results will be 
announced in our August issue. Please send entries to competition 
organiser Phil Cain on phil@headstar.com or call him on 01273 231 
291 with any queries.


* SHOPPING OUT LOUD.

A voice-activated shopping centre has been added to the services 
offered by Freedom Network (http://www.freedombox.info), a US-
based internet portal aimed at people unable to use graphical user 
interfaces.

Online book shop Amazon (http://www.amazon.com) is among 
retailers allowing Freedom Network subscribers to search, register and 
search their sites using their voices. Subscribers will also be able to 
receive sample audio tracks and customer reviews.

In a statement Freedom Network chief executive Mike Calvo, himself 
blind, said: "The launch is an important first step in our efforts to 
bring the products and services of our many online retailers to the 
blind and disabled in an environment where accessibility is 
guaranteed."


* NEWS IN BRIEF:

* SOCIETY CONNECTIONS: The Internet Society, the non-profit, 
international membership organisation that champions and helps 
develop the internet, is forming a new chapter devoted to disabilities. 
Membership is free. Those interested should join the society (which is 
also free) at http://www.isoc.org and then email Michael Burks on 
mburks952@worldnet.att.net saying you wish to join the disabilities 
chapter.

* ELECTRONIC BROWSING: ‘Finding e-books on the internet’, a 
new book from blind author and E-Access Bulletin reader Anna 
Dresner, describes how to obtain both free and paid-for books from 
many and various web sites:
http://www.nbp.org/ebook.html

* LEGAL ADVICE: The award-winning ‘law on the web’ online 
legal practice has adopted Web Standards Project guidelines on access 
to legal and advice information on the internet 
(http://www.webstandards.org.uk). Feedback on the site from people 
with visual impairments is welcomed:
http://www.lawontheweb.co.uk

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO - 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

* SCALE MODELS: In our last two issues, accessible online mapping 
has been a topic of discussion in the Inbox. John Gardner, director of 
the Science Access Project at Oregon State University, says he was 
particularly interested in last month’s note from Dave Pawson from 
the RNIB about scalable vector graphics (SVG - 
http://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG).

Gardner writes: “My group is developing an extension to the Open 
Source SVG browser and guidelines that make SVG universally 
usable for all graphical information, including maps. We've published 
several papers on this project, such as the one at:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2001/proceedings/0103gardner.html

He also cites a Canadian cartographic project making accessible SVG 
maps, at:
http://tactile.nrcan.gc.ca


* INTERNATIONAL SITUATION: Larry Johnson from Texas 
writes: “The US National Library Service (NLS) maintains a web site 
with listings for books in Braille and recorded from organisations in 
the US, Canada and Great Britain. But when I asked my regional 
library for the blind in Austin, Texas for their assistance in borrowing 
a book from the UK National Library for the Blind, they told me they 
have no arrangements for doing so.

“I was shocked. Why are these listings on the NLS website? They 
replied that the website was also for the use of sighted librarians, and 
that these folks might have special access or arrangements with those 
lending organisations. Frankly, this makes little sense to me. Is there a 
way for a blind person in the US to borrow books from Braille 
libraries in the UK?” [Responses to inbox@headstar.com]


* WARNING SIGNAL: Our regular reader and correspondent David 
Porter writes in to ask for advice on behalf of a friend of his who is 
registered blind. “Since she has retinitis pigmentosa, she has tunnel 
vision. As the condition develops, the tunnel will become narrower. 
When shopping in the supermarket, no matter how carefully she uses 
the shopping trolley, she bumps into other people.

“I wonder if any reader knows of a gadget (perhaps a battery operated 
unit with flashing light, with a bleeper - although this could alert 
potential thieves to her disability) or maybe an adaptation of the 
gadgets now built into cars, which warns drivers when they are 
moving too close to another vehicle, or other obstruction. If you've 
never seen one of these, they emit rapid bleeps, which increase in 
volume as the "closing distance" decreases - warning the driver to 
stop.

“My friend is also a keen swimmer but, because of her restricted view, 
frequently does not see other swimmers until she has bumped into 
them. I think electronic warnings would not cope well with water - 
any suggestions for this problem as well?”
[Responses to  inbox@headstar.com]


* UNIFIED MATHEMATICS: Susan Jolly from Los Alamos, New 
Mexico, writes: “I am a sighted computational scientist in the US with 
an interest in Braille mathematics, and ran across your recent 
informative article on the subject (see issue 25, January 2002).

“What is actually happening regarding a possible Braille unification is 
that there is a proposal to make a new Braille code for maths that 
would be very similar to the current UK one and completely unlike the 
Nemeth code used here in the States. (These two codes are so different 
there is no way to merge them or come up with a compromise). This 
proposal has been designed mainly by non-technical persons. 
Naturally, the technical Braille readers here have very negative views 
about simply discarding what they feel to be a better code than the one 
used in the UK.

“I would love to correspond with someone who actually uses the UK 
Braille maths code in order to learn their opinion on the proposed 
'unification' which is supposed to be voted on next year.” [Responses 
to inbox@headstar.com]

[Section two ends.]


* SECTION THREE: ON SITE
- ST DUNSTAN'S (Part One).

* FIRST CLASS SERVICE.
by Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com

The St Dunstan’s charity for blind ex-servicepeople
(http://www.st-dunstans.org.uk) was founded in 1915 by the 
newspaper proprietor Sir Arthur Pearson, who was himself blind. 
Pearson wanted to support the many men and women being blinded in 
the First World War, often by mustard gas. As time has passed and 
major conflicts become less frequent, the organisation’s remit has 
been expanded to cover not just injuries suffered in active service but 
any sight problems suffered by ex-servicepeople and their families, 
including those resulting from old age.

There are now some 753 ‘St Dunstaners’, and the charity helps a 
further 500 spouses and a similar number of widows and widowers. It 
also operates the Diana Gubbay Trust for the benefit of men and 
women in the emergency services who become blind.

The charity’s headquarters is in London but its main centre for 
rehabilitation work, including computer training, is in Ovingdean, 
perched atop imposing white cliffs on the Sussex coast near Brighton.

Initial training in independent living including access to computers 
and other technologies where relevant usually takes place during 
residential courses at Ovingdean. Follow-up work takes place in 
people’s homes (which are often rented from or part-funded by St 
Dunstan’s), and further assistance can include loans for computer 
equipment.

The general manager at Ovingdean is Dick Lake, who joined last year 
following 35 years in the Navy as head of the service’s social work 
department. He is in no doubt of the value and importance of modern 
technologies for the sort of rehabilitation work that is central to people 
who are blinded or become visually impaired.

“Computers and associated technologies represent a quantum leap for 
blind people in terms of their quality of life and access to 
employment. In the past people had to learn Braille or Moon, whereas 
now they can stick with what they know using a computer keyboard,” 
Lake says.

“For older people in particular who are newly visually impaired, 
learning a new system like Braille is going to be hard and their touch 
sensitivity may have deteriorated so technology is of major 
importance.”

The Ovingdean centre is a striking building designed in the 1930s to 
resemble an aeroplane, with a high glass front echoing a cockpit and 
symmetrical wings that follow a standard lay-out on each floor to 
make it easy for people with visual impairment to find their way 
around.

The technology training centre is in a more modern annexe to the 
building and features around a dozen computers with large screens, 
plus special printers, scanners and a selection of access software and 
hardware including screen reader and screen magnification software. 
One of the machines has a CCTV camera linked to it so people can 
magnify documents and view them as part of a split-screen display 
controlled by a foot pedal.

Technology trainer Janis Sharp says that over the past two years 
interest among the older residents and visitors to Ovingdean has 
grown rapidly. “At first they said it was for the youngsters but as the 
internet continued to receive massive media exposure, and everything 
they came across has a ‘www’ address linked with it they gradually 
started to come in and ask what it was all about.”

People using the machines now range from an old soldier with an eye-
patch who slowly types out poems with his index finger, to people 
accessing machines remotely from as far afield as Ireland.

St Dunstaners living in the community have access to a telephone 
support service for help with computers and peripherals, and Sharp 
says it is usually possible to assist people fairly quickly over the phone 
since they can listen in to speech messages that the computer might be 
outputting. “We had one call recently about a jammed printer that 
turned out to be caused by creases in an envelope. The next day the St 
Dunstaner asked his housekeeper to iron all his envelopes.”

There is a swashbuckling feel to much of the activity around St 
Dunstan’s, as one might expect from an organisation working with ex-
servicepeople including special forces personnel. St Dunstaners 
regularly run in marathons, break motorbike speed records using radio 
guidance, ride horses, ski and enter yacht races. Now to these acts of 
derring-do a more sedentary but no less adventurous computer club 
has been added which meets twice a year to build machines, discuss 
the latest technologies and exchange tips.

Technology training can also be the key for ex-servicepeople who lose 
their sight to find fulfilling new employment. “Not as many people 
find employment as we’d like, as it is hard to get people back into the 
workplace”, says Lesley Styche, head of rehabilitation and training at 
St Dunstan’s. “But there are St Dunstaners working as everything 
from accountants to hydrotherapists and even at the BBC following 
computer courses.”

[Section three ends.]


* SECTION FOUR: A READER WRITES
- ST DUNSTAN’S (Part Two).

* Mark Threadgold spent 17 years in the Royal Corps of Signals, 
which is responsible for the British Army’s global communications 
network, before losing his sight two years ago after receiving a severe 
head injury. He was subsequently helped in his rehabilitation by the St 
Dunstan’s organisation for visually impaired ex-servicepeople (see 
previous section, this issue) and writes here on his experiences in 
learning how to work with computers once more.

* ENGINEERING A DIGITAL RECOVERY.

I was extremely lucky to be taken into the family of St Dunstan’s on 
leaving hospital. This was the start of a year of excellent training in 
mobility, independent living skills such as cooking, and computer use.

As I had been an electronics engineer prior to losing my sight, part of 
my job involved maintenance and repair of desktop PCs. It was also 

something I tried to keep up to date outside work as a hobby. After my 
injury I presumed my use of the computer had come to an end. My 
introduction to screen-readers was, therefore, an absolute revelation!

The first stage in the relearning process was to master touch-typing. 
After four or five days, and one very patient teacher, I had the basics 
sorted out. Plenty of practice saw me racing round the keyboard with 
far more confidence than competence! My total lack of sight meant 
this device was to become my only method of both control and data 
input.

Having developed enough confidence to go a little further I had my 
own computer brought up to St Dunstan’s. The HAL screen reader 
from Dolphin Computer Access 
(http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/products/hal.htm) was installed for me 
so with this set up in my room I could practice all night if I so wished. 
Getting to grips with the different applications was the next logical 
step. Microsoft Word 97 had previously been my choice of word 
processor and this is where we started. Finding commands through the 
drop down menus quickly became a chore. Shortcut keys were the 
faster option, if only I could remember them all. While attempting to 
find a list of these in the help file I was told they had already been 
printed off. As it was sixteen pages of A4 long I decided that maybe 
shortcut keys were not for me and resigned myself to using the drop 
down menus.

I believe my previous experience with the programs helped a lot. As I 
could remember the various dialogue boxes and their layout it made 
explaining them to me simpler. This theory was reinforced when I was 
asked a question by another St Dunstaner, who was almost two 
generations my senior and had never previously seen computers. At 
the dinner table he asked, "What is the cursor?" I thought about this 
for quite some time! How on earth do you describe what a cursor is to 
someone who has never seen one? We had a hilarious discussion 
about the little flashing capital ‘I’ that shows you where your typing is 
going to appear. Getting across that this moved by itself each time you 
pressed a key must have made it sound like black magic. I spent the 
next week praying that nobody would introduce him to the mouse!

Other applications came along quickly. I would experiment with my 
own computer in the evenings and ask how to fix it the following day! 
They say you learn by your mistakes, and I made plenty of learning 
opportunities. The various applications now required different devices 
to work. Setting up the printer and modem were simple enough. The 
internal telephone system did not like being dialled out through with 
the standard modem so I had my mobile phone soft modem installed. 
With this I got my web account settings put back in and started using 
email again. I am a huge fan of the internet and was now in touch with 
some of my friends again using it. Utilities such as the web search tool 
Webferret (http://www.zdnet.com/ferret) and the file compressor 
Winzip (http://www.winzip.com) were re-installed and learned again. 
Customising desktop settings and making up shortcut keys to launch 
programs was all refreshed.

One major leap in independence I found was through text reading 
software that works with a scanner to read printed text. After being 
introduced to the Cicero application, again from Dolphin Computer 
Access (http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/products/cicero.htm), I could 
read my post simply and privately with the press of a single key. This 
did, of course, assume you had the text facing downwards on the 
scanner! I lost count of the times I was told the page on the scanner 
was blank. This led to a simple method of marking papers by turning 
down the top left corner of the page as I took it out of the envelope. I 
still use this technique with documents I print or receive through the 
post.

With my background in engineering my thoughts now turned to future 
employment. After a long search a local IT training company was 
found, and after a visit to introduce them to the screen reader and 
present myself as blind but mostly sane, they agreed to take me on a 
course. I am now midway through a Microsoft Certified System 
Engineer (MCSE) course with them for networking with Windows 
2000.

This is proving very interesting as well as challenging. The main 
challenge is not with the computers, but with the course textual 
information. We all forgot I couldn't read the two inch thick books 
that form the course material! If the staff of St Dunstans hadn't done 
such a good job with the early training I would not have this problem 
now!

[Section four ends.]


* SECTION FIVE: FOCUS
- SPEECH TECHNOLOGY.

* TALKING TO MACHINES.
By Judith Markowitz  judith@jmarkowitz.com

Speech-processing professionals often point to the 'voice web' as the 
key to achieving the goal of developing content that is accessible 
anytime, anywhere and on any device.

The voice web has been defined in various ways. At its core, it 
possible to access content on the internet by voice, with speech input 
and output providing part or all of the human interface. The channel 
can be wired, but is expected to be primarily wireless, and voice web 
input devices extend from standard telephones to future generations of 
multi-purpose, internet-enabled devices.


Excitement about the voice web is predicated on continued strong 
growth of the internet, and global wireless deployments, and of the 
bonding of those two technologies. The Gartner Group, for example, 
has projected that the number of mobile phones deployed worldwide 
will exceed one billion before 2005 and has indicated that it expects 
80 per cent of new handheld devices will feature some form of 
internet connection.

Another force driving the voice web is the formation of standards, 
most importantly VoiceXML. This standard sets out the grammar that 
will be used in interpreting speech and the XML extensions needed to 
create the voice web applications of today. VoiceXML's power lies in 
its sponsorship by the World Wide Web Consortium 
(http://www.w3.org) and the widespread commitment from speech 
technology companies, non- government and industry.

The VoiceXML Forum (http://www.voicexml.org), an industry 
organisation founded by AT&T, IBM, Lucent and Motorola, is 
working on extensions to the standard designed to support the next 
generation of input devices. It is not alone. In October 2001, 
Microsoft, Cisco, Comverse, Intel, Philips and speech technology 
specialist SpeechWorks announced the Speech Applications Language 
Tags initiative (SALT - http://www.saltforum.org). SALT will 
formulate XML extensions for incorporating speech into future 
generations of input devices capable of true multi-modal 
communication.

All of this work is designed to move the industry and the marketplace 
closer to anytime, anywhere, any device capabilities. This goal is 
achievable eventually, although voice web applications that are 
moving into the mainstream today are still at the earliest stage of 
evolution. They are highly constrained in the content which can be 
accessed, because interaction is menu oriented, designed primarily for 
standard telephones and often operating in only one language.

Having said that, consumers can already use voice portals to access 
weather information, find the nearest Starbucks or hear what is 
playing at local cinemas. Unified messaging systems provide mobile 
professionals and others with a single access point for voicemail, 
email and fax. Corporate customer relationship management (CRM) 
systems, such as the one deployed by car maintenance company 
JiffyLube (http://www.jiffylube.com), is starting to offer customers 
appointment scheduling and service alerts. Voice application networks 
within enterprises give sales reps and other mobile professionals 
access to a combination of the web and corporate data sources, 
including unified messaging and access to customer data. 

Many first-stage voice web applications of today look beyond 
standard telephones. In warehouses and factories, speech input/output 
is achieved through wearable devices and radio-frequency 
transmission. The voice application network technology has already 
extended the reach of those systems to support just-in-time and e-
commerce ordering systems. In-vehicle systems, such as the OnStar 
Virtual Advisor (http://www.onstar.com), embedded far-field 
microphones to provide many of the same services available from 
voice portals and voice application networks. 

Distributed speech technology is enabling next-generation PDAs 
(personal digital assistants), such as Compaq's iPaq, to access a range 
of services from the voice web, including dictation and unified 
messaging. Compact voice biometrics are being embedded into toys 
and cell phones. They are also being put onto smart-cards for point-of-
sale speaker authentication.

The voice web is not the only category of application moving the 
industry closer to anytime, anywhere, any device access. The ability to 
use advanced dictation technology in combination with information 
retrieval tools, and sometimes with text-independent speaker 
identification, has made it possible to add audio and audiovisual 
sources (news broadcasts, calls to a call centre, movies) to the content 
that can be mined for information. This constellation of technologies 
is called audio-mining or audio-indexing. Prior to its deployment, 
indexing of audio sources required a great deal of time-consuming 
manual labour.

Today, it is possible to index, search and retrieve information from 
large databases of audio and audiovisual sources in near real time. For 
example, it would be possible to index and search yesterday's CNN 
broadcasts for questions, such as "What did George W Bush say about 
Saddam Hussein?" It is also possible for a call centre supervisor to 
search last month's calls for all comments about a specific product.

Many of the advances and trends described above are available 
commercially by virtue of advances in the computing and 
communications infrastructures. The very existence of the voice web, 
like its name, is derived from the success of the internet. The Pentium 
III processor was dubbed "the ASR chip" because its instructions set 
supports the kinds of operations needed for advanced ASR (automated 
speech recognition). In telecommunications, 2.5G and 3G (third 
generation) systems promise support for advanced multi-modal 
devices. The recent economic downturn has delayed, but not stopped, 
this infrastructure evolution.

Sometimes speech acts as an enabling technology. One of the best 
examples of this effect is in-vehicle systems. There may still be 
discussions about whether speech should be a cornerstone of 
telematics, but those discussions are not being held in legislative 
bodies. One by one, legislators are climbing on the hands-free 
bandwagon.

Their actions have heightened the value of speech as an enabler of the 

office-in-the-car. The rapid "miniaturisation" of mobile phones and 
other handheld devices has spawned add-on tools such as finger-worn 
pointing tools. None of these tools are as flexible as talking, making 
speech an enabling technology for next-generation handheld devices.

NOTE: This is the second part of an article that first appeared in 
Speech Technology Magazine
(http://www.speechtek.com/st.mag/index.shtml), a US-based
publication. The first part was published in our last issue, and covered
 topics including text-to-speech technology; voice-based biometrics; 
and microphone technology. Judith Markowitz 
(http://www.jmarkowitz.com) is the associate editor of the magazine 
and is a leading independent analyst in the speech technology and 
voice biometric fields.

[Section five ends.]


* HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message.
Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be 
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access 
bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

* PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News Editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
