* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

Technology news for people with visual impairment
(http://www.e-accessibility.com).

Sponsored by the RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk)
and the National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org).

Please forward to others so they can subscribe
by emailing eab-subs@headstar.com
(full details at the end).

NOTE: To aid navigation, all headings begin with an asterisk and end 
with a full stop. All items are numbered in the contents and throughout, 
with numbers immediately after the asterisks. Please let us know if 
anything else would help.

* ISSUE 35, NOVEMBER 2002.

* CONTENTS:

Section one: News.

1: Accessible cinema plan rejected
- film council rejects audio description.

2: Digital TV made easy
- design initiative launches.

3: Audio description coalition to fight on
- but US campaign suffers court defeat.

4: Text messages find a voice
- mobile phone technology tested.

5: Auditors to scrutinise e-government accessibility
- report due in New Year.

6: Counselling service hits the web
- new emotional support service.

7: US tax forms bypass access regulations
- loophole in e-government.

News in brief: 8: New Deal – accessible online poker; 9: Touch Screen 
– tests for tactile image display; 10: Reader's Digest – online restaurant 
guide; 11: Access To Italy – new directory of resources.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
- 12: Nominate Yourself – Bafta update; 13: Analogue Puzzle – audio 
described TV; 14: Shropshire Standard – accessible libraries; 15: Lima 
Bravo – help for Peruvian project.

16: Section three: Focus – Retailing.
High street lottery: How well served is the visually impaired customer 
of a high street consumer technology store? Mel Poluck investigates.

17: Section four: Analysis – The Arts.
Museums without walls: Most museums and galleries are using 
multimedia aids to enhance the experience of  visitors, but visually 
impaired people are often overlooked. Jemima Kiss surveys the latest 
access developments.

18: Section five: Formatting - Reader Survey.
Improving the service: Editor Dan Jellinek reports on readers' 
suggestions for improvements to the E-Access Bulletin format, and 
outlines a plan to draw up a new standard for email newsletters.

[Contents ends.]


* SECTION ONE: NEWS.

*1: ACCESSIBLE CINEMA PLAN REJECTED

The UK's Film Council has rejected a proposal to spend six million 
pounds on equipping cinemas with technology that would make films 
accessible to visually impaired people.

The plan, put forward by the Cinema Exhibitors Association, would 
have installed audio description and subtitling equipment in cinemas 
nationwide. It was one of three bids competing for a pot of money 
from the national lottery earmarked for the council's 'specialised 
exhibition and distribution strategy' (http://fastlink.headstar.com/film). 
The strategy aims to "develop film culture in the UK by improving 
access to, and education about, the moving image" and specifies that 
"the needs of people with disabilities must inform and be integral to 
any proposed developments".

However, according to the council, "the vast majority of those 
responding to a consultation with film distributors and cinemas felt this 
wasn't the best way of serving disabled people. In particular question 
marks were raised both over the technology proposed and the lack of 
expertise available to operate it in individual venues." The cash will be 
used instead to subsidise screenings of foreign and 'art house' films in 
regional cinemas.

Last month, the Film Council appointed consultants Access Matters 
(http://www.accessmattersltd.co.uk) to help develop its strategy on 
disability issues. 


*2: DIGITAL TV MADE EASY.

An initiative to make designers of digital television products more 
aware of the difficulties experienced by all kinds of user, including 
visually impaired people, has been launched by 'Easy TV', a 
partnership between the Independent Television Commission (ITC), 
the Consumers' Association and the Design Council.

As part of the initiative (http://fastlink.headstar.com/easy), the ITC and 
Consumers' Association are co-sponsoring an interactive digital 
television product design award that will be promoted in design 
colleges across the UK. Research for Easy TV recently discovered that 
marginalised groups such as disabled or aged people would be more 
likely to use digital television if there were fewer buttons on remote 
controls, quicker responses to button presses and simpler user manuals.

The new move fits in with the non-prescriptive, 'best practice' 
approach towards accessibility for consumer technology products set 
out by the government in its new Communications Bill, which is due to 
be introduced into Parliament by the end of the year. While it sets 
accessibility targets for digital television content, it leaves product 
issues such as the design of television sets up to manufacturers.

Disability groups feel this approach does not go far enough. A 
spokesperson for the RNIB said: "Easy TV helps get the message 
across to manufacturers and designers, but best practice is not enough, 
we would like to see standardisation." 

Readers of E-Access Bulletin who have experienced the technology are 
invited to send us suggestions for design improvements to television 
sets, remote controls and set-top boxes. All replies should be sent to 
derek@headstar.com.


*3: AUDIO DESCRIPTION COALITION TO FIGHT ON.

US access campaigners have pledged to continue their campaign to 
make audio description of a minimum amount of television and video 
programming mandatory, after an appeals court scrapped existing 
quotas.

Since April this year the Federal Communications Commission has 
required television networks to broadcast at least 50 hours of audio 
described programming every three months. The National Association 
of Broadcasters, the National Cable Telecommunications Association 
and the National Motion Picture Association of America mounted a 
challenge against the regulations in March, claiming they imposed 
'compelled speech' and were inconsistent with the first amendment of 
the US Constitution (see E-Access Bulletin, March 2002). On 8 
November the court ruled in their favour, meaning the continuation of 
audio description at these levels is now voluntary.

"It will be really interesting to see whether they continue to do what 
they have been doing really well since April," said Margaret Pfanstiehl, 
chair of the National Television and Video Access Coalition, a group 
of 17 organisations attempting to defend the quotas.

The coalition will now try to reinstate the rule by persuading Congress 
of its importance, said Pfansteihl, though this could take as long as ten 
years following the recent Republican majority at the US mid-term 
elections. "Republican control means short term success is unlikely. 
They are in a strong mood to deregulate everything," she said.


*4: TEXT MESSAGES FIND A VOICE.

New technology allowing visually impaired people to listen to mobile 
phone text messages through conversion to natural-sounding speech is 
being developed by BT, the telecommunications company announced 
this month.

The technology, which could become commercially available within a 
year, can be installed on a mobile phone directly or on a palm-top 
computer that has an infra-red link to a phone. Users can maintain 
privacy by listening to their messages through earphones, and the 
speech output can be programmed to recognise popular text messaging 
shortcuts which could otherwise sound like gibberish.

According to Adam Oliver of BTexact (http://www.btexact.com), BT's 
advanced technology research arm, the project was initiated after 
visually impaired teenagers visited BT as part of a school project. "One 
of the visitors, Mesad, made an innocent remark about how difficult it 
was for him to access text messages, and it all started from there," said 
Oliver. BT has since tested the new technology with the help of Able2, 
its own internal network of disabled employees 
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/able2).

BT is not the only mobile service provider to be working on the speech 
conversion of text messages, however. About a year ago its rival 
Vodafone announced it was working on a similar system, though it 
could not offer a firm delivery date (see E-Access Bulletin, December 
2001).


*5: AUDITORS TO SCRUTINISE E-GOVERNMENT 
ACCESSIBILITY.

The National Audit Office (http://www.nao.gov.uk), the official 
auditor of UK government agencies, is to publish a report on the 
accessibility of government web and other electronic services early in 
the New Year, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

The report will assess how well departments conform to the 
international accessibility guidelines issued by the World Wide Web 
Consortium (http://www.w3.org/wai) as well as the government's own 
guidelines developed by the Office of the e-Envoy 
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/webg). 

Jeremy Lonsdale, the NAO official who is currently drafting the report, 
said the audit will extend beyond web services to other electronic 
media. "We are also picking up on issues relating to digital television," 
he said. In coming to its conclusions, the audit office will draw on the 
input of the RNIB and Age Concern, Lonsdale said.


*6: COUNSELLING SERVICE HITS THE WEB.

A new web site aimed at helping those providing emotional and 
psychological support services to visually impaired people, and 
improving access to their services, has been launched by the RNIB.

The site (http://www.unifiedlinks.com/~rnib) is being developed to 
provide training information for counsellors; news about the latest 
research; information on how to find a local counsellor; and discussion 
forums. Set up by the RNIB's emotional support division, it is aimed at 
both sighted counsellors and those who are themselves visually 
impaired; and at visually impaired people seeking support either for 
problems relating to their sight loss or on other issues.

The writer Sue Townsend, speaking at the site's launch, said: "As soon 
as someone gives you the diagnosis that you are losing your sight, you 
need a support system."

Since the site's launch last month there have been technical problems 
with accessing it, said Teresa Nicholls, an RNIB counsellor. However 
once the teething problems have been sorted out, stage two of the 
service's development will include an online library of case histories 
and articles by counsellors working with visually impaired clients.


*7: US TAX FORMS BYPASS ACCESS REGULATIONS.

The US tax office will not require companies offering online tax return 
services to comply with access requirements applying to other 
government services, it has emerged.

Internal Revenue Service official Terry Lutes said it will be up to 
companies providing online filing to decide whether or not they will 
comply with section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, a law requiring US 
government agencies to provide accessible services.

Lutes' comments came at a meeting of the Council for Electronic 
Revenue Communication Advancement in Arlington held shortly after 
the unveiling of an agreement on 30 October which allows companies 
to supply online filing 
(http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/po3587.htm).

The revenue service plans to publish a web page providing links to the 
new online filing services in January next year.


*NEWS IN BRIEF.

*8: NEW DEAL: An upgraded version of an accessible poker game 
which can be used with Window-Eyes screen reading software was 
released last month by US company ZForm. Other improvements 
include improved sound effects, creating a Wild West saloon 
ambience. To sign up for a trial version see:
http://www.zform.com .

*9: TOUCH SCREEN: National Federation of the Blind members are 
to test a new tactile computer display that could help visually impaired 
people read digital images, it was announced last month. The interface, 
which has been developed by the US National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, is a densely packed grid of retractable steel pins 
which can render content such as maps. The trials aim to develop a 
product to retail for around 2,000 dollars:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/nist .

*10: READER'S DIGEST: A web listing service for UK restaurants 
offering Braille and large print menus has received positive feedback 
from users, chefs and restaurant owners, according to its creator, 
Braille transcription service provider A2i. An email nomination facility 
- nominations@a2i.co.uk - allows customers to suggest a favourite 
restaurant they would like to have menus in Braille or large print, and 
the directory itself is at:
http://www.a2i.co.uk/links.html#restaurants .

* 11: ACCESS TO ITALY: An Italian language web resource on 
accessibility issues has been launched by IWA Italia, the country's arm 
of the International Webmasters Association, which has newly merged 
with the HTML Writers Guild to form the world's largest association 
for web professionals (http://www.iwanet.org). The resource is at:
http://www.webaccessibile.org .

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

*12: NOMINATE YOURSELF: Julie Howell, internet campaigns 
officer at the RNIB, has written to respond to Ian Lloyd's criticisms of 
the winners of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts 
accessibility awards (see E-Access Bulletin, September and October 
2002). Howell, who was on the judging panel for these awards, says: "I 
don't dispute Ian's criticisms.  Very few of the candidate sites were 100 
per cent accessible and this was disappointing.

"However, judges in this situation have to select a shortlist from those 
sites that are submitted for the award.  That's not to say that the 
BAFTA shortlist represented the best of a bad bunch, rather the best of 
a fairly limited bunch of varying quality.

"I agree that we need to raise the standard. To do this, we need more 
organisations that produce accessible sites to put themselves forward 
for nomination. The awards run by BAFTA; the British Interactive 
Multimedia Association (http://www.bima.co.uk); and the Government 
Internet Forum (http://www.internetforum.gov.uk) all now include 
accessibility among the essential criteria for short-listing.

"There are prizes to be won for creating accessible, usable, engaging 
sites. If you are responsible for a site that you feel should win a prize 
for attention to accessibility, don't be shy, nominate yourself!" [Further 
comments to inbox@headstar.com].


*13: ANALOGUE PUZZLE: Jane Fleming, a bulletin reader who likes 
to watch television and is registered blind, is puzzled by our recent 
reporting of the first ever audio description services on ordinary 
analogue television from the BBC (see E-Access Bulletin, October 
2002).

"Text narrative in BBC analogue? I thought we were all expected to go 
digital, satellite and so on, so the government could sell the analogue 
off. What is the point of analogue if it will expire in three years time?" 
she asks. Fleming also says she would like to see research into audio 
teletext services. [Further comments to inbox@headstar.com].


*14: SHROPSHIRE STANDARD: Susan White, equal access 
librarian, Shropshire Libraries, says: "I was interested by the comment 
from the US reader about internet access (see 'limited access,' inbox, 
last issue). He made the important point that most visually impaired 
people are living on fixed incomes and, if they can afford a computer, 
most likely cannot afford internet access.

"Here in the UK, The People's Network 
(http://www.peoplesnetwork.gov.uk) is providing free access to 
computers and the internet in public libraries. Here in Shropshire we 
are purchasing Supernova speech and magnifying software to help 
visually impaired people use the facilities." [Further comments to 
inbox@headstar.com].


*15: LIMA BRAVO: Many readers wrote in with offers of assistance 
to our reader Gina Bardelli of Lima, Peru who appealed for help in 
creating an information and communications centre for the blind at a 
district library.

The ONCE Foundation for Latin America (FOAL) invited her to send 
it a project proposal, and said that if the project fitted their criteria it 
would be able to help. John Rae, president of the National Federation 
of the Blind: Advocates for Equality in Canada (http://www.nfbae.ca), 
suggested that Bardelli might wish to contact the Canadian Embassy in 
Peru, and inquire if the Canadian International Development Agency 
might help, because it has done some disability-related work in the 
past.

Other offers of help came from Estela Landeros-Dugourd, senior 
manager, programs for people with disabilities, Organization of 
American States and Robert Langford, president of International 
Services for the Physically Challenged in Texas. Thanks to everyone 
for their offers of assistance.

[Section two ends].


*16: SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- RETAILING.

HIGH STREET LOTTERY.
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com

The process of buying a new computer or mobile phone on the high 
street can be difficult at the best of times, as you struggle to work out 
which is the best tariff or simply try to attract the attention of one of 
the overworked sales staff.

For visually impaired people, there are added difficulties and these are 
sometimes made worse by a lack of awareness among store employees 
of what different people's needs might be.

The majority of visually impaired computer users rely on a small 
number of specialist services to install special applications after they 
have bought the machine, often with guidance from the RNIB – but 
they still have to buy the computer in the first place, and that will 
usually mean a trip to the high street.

"I can't remember when I had previously felt so alienated and 
marginalised when trying to buy something on the high street," said 
one E-Access Bulletin reader of his experience of buying a home 
computer from a branch of Dixons.

"The shop assistants could spout on with great enthusiasm, once I said 
I wanted to make music using the computer. They said: 'I've got this 
fantastic programme, you can do A, B, C . . . X, Y, Z with it. But it's 
visual I'm afraid, so you would probably have problems if you tried to 
use it.'

"By contrast, he didn't even know the difference between voice 
activation and speech output! In other words, he could tell me 
everything about the parts of the PC I'd be unable to use, and nothing 
about the parts of the software that were essential to me as a blind user. 
I dared not ask him about the keyboard. I think I bought the PC in spite 
of, rather than because of the information I received at the shop. I got 
the impression he thought that 'The Blind' would have provided me 
with a 'special' computer."

Not everyone's experiences are negative. Another blind reader was 
pleased with her experience at The Link mobile phone shop, part of the 
same retail group as Dixons.

"The assistant was extremely helpful from the outset and showed me a 
variety of phones, paying particular attention to their layout and the 
usability of the keys. Once I had made my choice, the assistant not 
only spent some considerable time setting up the phone, she showed 
me how to use it and allowed me to ring the store's land line to get the 
feel of it. I left the store feeling that I had received an excellent service 
and felt confident enough to use the phone."

The variation in service is likely to be caused by gaps in staff training 
from one outlet to another. The Dixons Group (http://www.dixons-
group-plc.co.uk), whose subsidiaries also include Currys and PC 
World, does have a programme of staff training on new products but 
this does not appear to include training on disability.

However, the group does have a disability working group cutting 
across all access issues. The group is currently working on a best 
practice audit, in association with the Disability Rights Commission, 
and recently carried out a 'mystery shopper' exercise in association 
with the disability advocacy group POhWER, to see how accessible 
their shops are.

The 'shoppers' made a range of enquiries and purchases, before 
reporting back to the company with their experiences. Among 56 
volunteers with disabilities who took part in this exercise, just one was 
visually impaired, but Dixons acknowledged that the experiences of 
this blind person had uncovered some key shortfalls.

The project's co-ordinator Jane Dellow said the visually impaired 
participant "had the most traumatic experience". He was left for a long 
time unattended by staff and in some shops led by the hand and told to 
"look" at products. 

These findings would feed into improvements in future working 
practices, Dellow said, in particular their staff training system.

Guidance from the Disability Rights Commission suggests adjustments 
retailers should consider include providing appropriate or additional 
training for staff; modifying or adapting equipment potentially used by 
disabled people in stores; and making service literature and instructions 
more accessible, by for example making Braille versions available.

According to a spokesperson at the British Retail Consortium, every 
major retailer is looking at current policy to keep up to date with the 
Disability Discrimination Act, which will shortly require that visually 
impaired people should receive the same level of customer service as 
sighted people. It may not be possible to train every member of staff, 
he  says, but the requirement to made 'reasonable adjustments' is 
spurring training in this area.

The availability of product literature in Braille is inconsistent across 
outlets. While it is available from Dixons group retailers, and the 
mobile phone operator and retail chain T-Mobile (formerly One2One), 
the Time company – manufacturers of Tiny computers, Time 
computers and owners of the high street chain Computer World – do 
not produce any.

Time does say, however, that its stores' aisles are kept clear and staff 
are encouraged to show customers large fonts, large screens and "help 
blind people around the shop". In future it may take a little more than 
this from retailers everywhere if they are to keep one step ahead of the 
law.

[Section three ends.]


*17: SECTION FOUR: ANALYSIS
- THE ARTS.

MUSEUMS WITHOUT WALLS.
by Jemima Kiss  jemimakiss@hotmail.com

The hosting this month of a seminar at the Tate Modern for museum 
and art gallery managers on improving access for visually impaired 
people – 'challenging ocularcentricity', as the blurb has it – is a 
welcome development (see story 4, E-Access Bulletin, October 2002).

The UK's museum sector is making slow progress in adapting its 
exhibits for visually impaired visitors, despite the requirements of the 
1998 Disability Discrimination Act to improve access for disabled 
people to all organisations and services open to the public. Although 
most of the requirements of this legislation will not be compulsory 
until 2004, there currently appears to be a substantial gap between 
provision and demand which makes the deadline seem unrealistic.

Geof Armstrong, director of the National Disability Arts Forum 
(http://www.ndaf.org) which aims to create equality of opportunity in 
all aspects of the arts, says the task is daunting. With some 1.7 million 
blind or partially sighted people in the UK, institutions "are so awed by 
the implications that they put off serious action", he says.

Even where serious money is being spent on accessibility, the visually 
impaired are often overlooked. The Brighton Museum & Art Gallery, 
for example, recently underwent a ten million pound renovation, 
providing improved access for visitors in wheelchairs and updating 
exhibits with interactive features including touch screen displays and 
listening posts. But despite these new facilities, the 'full disabled 
access' advertised by the museum makes no provision for visually-
impaired visitors. 

The museum presents a typical example of problems faced by blind or 
partially-sighted visitors. Most galleries have necessarily low lighting 
to protect exhibits, prohibit visitors from touching items on display and 
provide audio guides based on the assumption that the visitor has full 
vision. Touch screen displays use small fonts on low contrast screens 
which are unreadable for most visually-impaired visitors, and listening 
posts assume that the visitor has read introductory text on nearby 
exhibits. Although staff at the Brighton museum are very willing to 
help, and will escort people with disabilities around the museum, many 
blind visitors feel happier when good facilities allow them to visit 
independently.  

Standard audio guides for able-bodied visitors give background 
information on the artist and explanations of the symbolism and ideas 
expressed in the work. Visually impaired visitors need a more practical 
description to allow them to build their own image of the layout and 
techniques used in the piece, but also need a delicate and 
understanding description of the more subtle elements of a work to 
express the mood and atmosphere.

Some organisations are working to address these issues. VocalEyes 
(http://www.vocaleyes.co.uk) is a UK audio description company 
working mainly with theatrical performance and live productions, 
which uses specially trained actors to concisely describe sight-based 
details such as visual jokes and set changes during shows. Keen to 
expand their services to other arts events, VocalEyes recently worked 
with the Kettle's Yard Gallery in Cambridge and then the Whitworth 
Art Gallery in Manchester to produce an audio guide accompaniment 
for an exhibition of paintings and reliefs by the British artist Ben 
Nicholson. Alongside the descriptions, delivered through a handset, 
tactile images are used to give visually impaired people a more 
complete understanding of each work. The exhibition is on until 15 
December in Manchester (for further information, telephone 0161 
2757450).

Some of the UK's larger national cultural institutions have also been 
making progress. The British Museum 
(http://www.thebritishmuseum.ac.uk), for example, offer not only a 
high contrast text-only website and large print guides, but a touch tour 
for the Roman and Egyptian sculpture galleries, which allows visually 
impaired visitors direct contact with the exhibits. It has also developed 
a sound-guide system for the Parthenon Galleries accompanied by a 
touch-section using 'Tiresias' software 
(http://www.cs.unc.edu/~hedlund/comp145/homes/blind3) that 
translates ancient Greek and Latin texts into Braille.

The Tate group of galleries is also innovating. As well as touch tours, 
audio guides, large print guides and reading aids such as magnifying 
cameras, its iMap website (http://www.tate.org.uk/imap) contains 
visually enhanced images and data which can be used with a Braille 
printer to create raised images, derived from drawings by Picasso and 
Matisse. Last month the site won the British Academy of Film and 
Television Arts' first award for web site accessibility (see E-Access 
Bulletin, October 2002). In the six weeks since iMap was launched 
more than 2,000 people downloaded the site's line drawings for use as 
raised images, compared to the few hundred visually impaired people 
who might visit the gallery each year.

Caro Howell, special projects curator at Tate Modern, says the most 
valuable element of access programmes is to encourage a personal 
engagement with the artwork. "There is little critical thinking about 
gallery education and visual impairment and a lack of developed 
methods. There needs to be greater emphasis on intellectual access. 
The web offers an exciting opportunity for delivering tailor-made and 
in-depth explorations of artworks that visually impaired people can 
explore independently."

[Section four ends.]


*18: SECTION FIVE: FORMATTING
- READER SURVEY.

IMPROVING THE SERVICE.
by Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com

Our recent reader consultation on the formatting of E-Access Bulletin 
produced lots of valuable feedback. Our existing format met with 
strong approval overall, but we do now propose to incorporate a few 
improvements suggested by readers, from our next issue. We also 
propose to move on to develop a draft 'email newsletter access 
standard' that may be used by others – more of this at the end of the 
article.

The formatting survey was initially triggered by a suggestion from one 
reader, Peter Link, that web addresses should be moved from within 
the text of stories to a list at the end of each article.

It seems that this is not a suggestion favoured by the majority of 
readers, however. Of the responses, 47 per cent were in favour of 
retaining the addresses as they are, compared with 24 per cent who 
would favour them placed at the end of stories. A further 6 per cent 
said the addresses should be both within the copy and at the end of 
stories, and 4 per cent said there should be an additional list at the end 
of the newsletter of all the links in the entire issue. The other 19 per 
cent had no preference.

There is therefore no strong mandate for changing where we present 
the web links, although if we have the resources in future we propose 
to experiment with offering multiple formats so people will be able to 
choose their favourite. We cannot predict exactly when we will be able 
to do this.

Moving on to whether or not we need to include full web addresses, 
including 'http://www' at the beginning for example, there was a 
strong majority in favour of retaining the longer formats. Two thirds of 
respondents (67 per cent) were in favour of this, mainly because some 
email packages such as Lotus Notes seem to only recognise the full 
versions as links.

The other third (33 per cent) of respondents did think it would be fine 
to do without 'http://' or 'http://www' unless the full address was 
different from the usual formulations, but on balance we have decided 
to stick with the full addresses to ensure accessibility by all forms of 
software.

Some 15 respondents suggested we produce a simple HTML version of 
the newsletter alongside the plain text version, allowing live links plus 
internal links from the contents to relevant stories. We think this is a 
good idea, and as with the alternative web address placings will strive 
to introduce such a version as an opt-in alternative as and when 
resources allow. We will also consider subsequently producing a 
Microsoft Word version as well, as this may apparently work even 
better with some access technologies.

Most respondents like our use of an asterisk to mark the beginnings of 
stories and sections, but there were two suggestions for adaptations to 
this device that seem like good improvements.

The first is a suggestion to change from using asterisks to the # (or 
'hash') symbol. The reason for this suggestion, as explained by reader 
John Gardner in the US, is that the asterisk character is often used as a 
'wild card' character in searches, so sometimes if you search for say 
'*1' which we might be using to mark a story, a search may take the 
asterisk to be a wild card and just find any place where a character was 
next to a '1'.

"My guess is that everybody could search and find #1 but that many 
search engines wouldn't find *1", Gardner says. So unless any reader 
contacts us with strong reasons why we should not do this, we propose 
to make that change from our next issue.

A further refinement is suggested by Gerry Chevalier of Canada. He 
says: "I do indeed appreciate the '*' special character as it allows me to 
use the FIND-NEXT search of my email client. However, I might 
suggest that you could use '***' to tag a main section and '**' to tag a 
section and '*' to tag an individual item.  That way, I could search say, 
for '***' if I wished to skip an entire section."

We think that this idea, using the new # characters rather than the *, is 
a good one, and so will from the next time use ### at the beginning of 
the issue and the beginning of the notes at the very end of the issue; ## 
for a section beginning; and # for a headline beginning an individual 
article.

There are four other points of formatting or style for increased 
accessibility we propose to adopt in addition to our existing rules, as 
follows:

- All paragraphs to end with a full stop, even if the last word is a web 
or email address.

- Never to use <> tags for web addresses.

- Where possible, to write compound words or phrases as separate 
words, for example saying 'home page' rather than 'homepage', as 
compound words can confuse screen readers and produce odd 
pronunciations.

- The minimisation of the introductory text we put at the top of each 
issue, before we get to the issue proper.

So that's about it. Thanks very much to everyone who provided 
feedback. And as well as incorporating the improvements from our 
next issue where indicated above, we also now propose to draft an 
'email newsletter access standard' which could be continually 
improved according to an ongoing process of consultation, and adopted 
by other organisations who find it useful. Headstar, the publishers of E-
Access Bulletin, will be happy to maintain the standard in partnership 
with any interested bodies – if you are interested in supporting the 
project, please contact the bulletin's editor Dan Jellinek on 
dan@headstar.com. The first draft standard will be published on the 
web next month, with full details provided in our next issue.

[Section five ends.]


* HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject 
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be 
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access 
bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

* PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter – Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

[Issue ends.]
