* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment.
Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute of the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid for screen readers, all headings begin with 
an asterisk and end with a full stop. All items are also now numbered 
in the contents and throughout the issue, with numbers appearing 
immediately after the asterisks. Please let us know if there is anything 
else we can do to make navigation easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 34, OCTOBER 2002.

* CONTENTS:

Section one: News.

1: Free and fair elections?
- draft bill of rights on voting.

2: First description service for analogue TV
- BBC launches audio trial in November.

3: Visugate opens
- with ambitions to be the best online blindness resource.

4: Opening up the arts
- Museums and galleries tackle audio description.

5: Heyanita hits Europe
- US web speech firm opens London office.

6: Copyright bill completes final stages
- legal digital copying due to begin next year.

News in brief: 7: Touchy-feely – tactile mouse site; 8: Customer 
service – buying from high street stores; 9: Open learning – 
international guidelines; 10: Telly addicts – researchers seek viewers.

11: Special notice: Techshare 2002 Conference
- Minister for Disabled People and e-Envoy to speak.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
- 12: Awards analysed – Bafta reviews; 13: Email crazy – the net by 
email only; 14: Limited access – cost restrictions; 15: Remote control – 
accessible TV; 16: Peruvian project – help sought; 17: Generous 
allowance? - student assistance.

18: Section three: Focus – technology at home.
- Smart living: Tamara Fletcher reports on the future for wired-up 
houses that can talk and help visually impaired people live independent 
lives.

19: Section four: Viewpoint – the developing world.
- Divided we stand: Some 90 per cent of visually impaired people live 
in the developing world. DPM Weerakoddy describes the frustration 
many experience in trying to access potentially liberating technologies.

20: Section five: Higher education – course selection.
- Many universities seem welcoming to blind people but the reality can 
be different, says Sabahattin Gucukoglu. Visually impaired students 
must take extreme care in choosing where to study.

[Contents ends.]


* SECTION ONE:

*1: FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS?

A Bill of Electoral Rights for People with Disabilities 
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/elec) has been drafted by disability rights 
activists and election administration officials from more than 24 
countries as part of a global initiative to make political processes more 
accessible.

The bill aims to define and promote the rights of people with 
disabilities in relation to all aspects of the electoral process, in 
particular the right to a secret vote and full physical accessibility of 
polling stations. The content, agreed at a conference in Sweden on 
September 14 (see pdf document at http://fastlink.headstar.com/conf ), 
is intended to be a template for reforming electoral regulations in 
participating countries.

The move will be met with interest by disability campaigners in the 
UK who are tracking ongoing trials here of electronic voting after 
concerns about their potential lack of accessibility (see E-Access 
Bulletin, May 2002). There were also concerns about the reliability and 
correct use of special new tactile voting templates after the last UK 
general election (see E-Access Bulletin, August 2001).

According to Sarah Gull of the UK Electoral Commission, the Swedish 
meeting allowed participants to report progress in their own countries 
and discover ideas for good practice from others. "For example, there 
were some interesting ideas about polling stations. In the UK a voter 
has to go to their nominated polling station, but some countries – such 
as Australia – have experimented with mobile polling stations. In the 
Ukraine, they have set them up in hospitals," she said.

The conference was co-organised by International IDEA 
(http://www.idea.int), the independent institute for democracy and 
electoral assistance set up by 14 governments, with US-funded 
advisory body the International Foundation for Election Systems 
(http://www.ifes.org).


*2: FIRST DESCRIPTION SERVICE FOR ANALOGUE TV.

For the first time, UK viewers will be able to access audio-described 
programmes on ordinary analogue TV when BBC2 screens 'Free 
wheelers', 'The man who learned to see' and 'One in seven' from the 
recent 'What's your problem?' season of programmes on attitudes 
towards disability, on Tuesday 5 November 
(http://www.bbc.co.uk/ouch/wyp).

Plans to develop further audio-described TV services over the next 10 
years are a current bone of contention between blindness groups and 
those drafting new government regulations in a Communications Bill 
that will shape access to digital media for the visually impaired (see E-
Access Bulletin, July and August 2002).

The RNIB says targets for accessible TV in the current draft of the bill 
(see http://fastlink.headstar.com/com) are too low, don't scale up fast 
enough, and aren't backed by a strong commitment by regulators.

According to Caroline Ellis of the RNIB, the November screenings are 
an opportunity for visually impaired people to experience audio-
described TV and request more of the services. "People should write to 
the BBC. If enough people show support for audio-described analogue 
services it will be difficult for the BBC to resist doing more and 
increase pressure on the government to set higher targets for digital 
services," she said.  

The RNIB is also targeting the House of Lords to make the necessary 
changes to the draft Bill. "There is a reasonable chance of a coalition 
between the Liberal Democrats and the Tories," said Ellis. The Liberal 
Democrats unanimously supported all key demands by the RNIB at 
their recent annual conference (http://fastlink.headstar.com/libdem)


*3: VISUGATE OPENS.

A UK-based web site with ambitions to become the definitive online 
source of information on blindness launched this month.

Visugate (http://www.visugate.org) is initially offering 'metadata' 
descriptions in text and audio formats on existing information from 19 
sources, including E-Access Bulletin, plus a search engine to aid 
navigation. Features planned for introduction in the months to come 
include information for special interest groups, job hunters and 
shoppers. Spin-off services include a Visual Impairment Learning 
Centre which will create and pilot web-based educational resources, 
and a Visual Impairment Library of Research (VILOR) (see E-Access 
Bulletin, December 2001 for further information on both these 
projects).

The launch took place on 10 October, World Sight Day 
(http://www.who.int/mediacentre/releases/pr79/en), an annual World 
Health Organisation event to promote the prevention and treatment of 
blindness. The day focused on the developing world, home to the 
majority of the world's blind people. For an insight into the mixture of 
hope and frustration experienced by visually impaired people in 
developing countries as they attempt to access technology see 'Divided 
we stand,' section four, this issue.


*4: OPENING UP THE ARTS.

Despite their widespread adoption of internet and mobile technology to 
relay additional non-visual information to visitors, most museums and 
art galleries have yet to find the right information to relay to a visually 
impaired audience.

All museums now need to take steps to allow visually impaired visitors 
to appreciate their exhibitions to comply with the Disability 
Discrimination Act. To help them tackle these issues, the Tate Modern 
gallery in London is hosting a series of four seminars with the first, 
'Challenging ocularcentricity in the museum', due to take place on 1 
November.

Among the biggest difficulties in creating non-visual descriptions 
come when trying to describe works of visual art which contain few 
references to the real world, says Tate Modern's special project curator 
Caro Howell. To help to home in a solution, the seminar will consider 
if museums can find an "aesthetic model that is embodied and includes 
smell, touch, taste, hearing, rhythm and balance".

The Tate sees itself as a leader in this field, having this month won the 
British Academy of Film and Television Arts' first award for web site 
accessibility for its 'iMap' site. The site (http://www.tate.org.uk/imap) 
contains visually enhanced images and data which can be used to 
create raised images, derived from drawings by Picasso and Matisse.

To attend the seminars email Caro Howell at Caro.Howell@tate.org.uk
or visit the web cast at
http://www.tate.org.uk/audiovideo

And for more on the Bafta accessibility awards see news, last issue and 
'Awards analysed', Inbox section, this issue.



*5: HEYANITA HITS EUROPE.

US voice technology company HeyAnita (http://www.heyanita.com) is 
the latest firm in the 'web speech' sector to make a move into the 
European market, following the arrival last year of Europe's first 
comprehensive voice-accessed web portal Eckoh 
(http://www.eckoh.com - see E-Access Bulletin August 2001 and 
September 2001).

The speech-web sector is still not taking off in Europe however, 
according to one observer. "It isn't an increasing market in my view. 
Europe is quite far behind and dare I say they're getting worse," says 
Bob McDowell business and technology consultant to Bloor Research. 
Mc Dowell has predicted in the past that Europe as a whole is at least 
18 months behind the US in the speech web field.

"The European market is not one market – you've got a very different 
climate in each country, and one needs a much more country by 
country focus," he said. "It is also much more highly regulated which 
is an inhibiting factor."

HeyAnita's expansion has so far gone as far as a small 'London' office 
near Newbury – actually some way outside the capital. "We anticipate 
organic growth into other countries – most likely Germany, France, 
Spain and Southern Africa," a spokesperson told E-Access Bulletin. 
"Interest in the first six weeks has been very high."


*6: COPYRIGHT BILL COMPLETES FINAL STAGES.

A bill to allow the limited non-profit production of accessible digital 
versions of copyright material passed through its final Parliamentary 
stages on 11 October (see also E-Access Bulletin, March 2002 and July 
2002).

The Copyright (Visually Impaired Persons) Bill is expected to be given 
Royal Assent in the next few months and come into force in the first 
half of next year, according to RNIB campaigns officer David Mann.

The government is planning a consultation next month to create 
guidance on the new law. Meanwhile, copyright holders have invited 
producers of accessible formats 
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/campaign/copyright_policy.htm#1) to a 
meeting in December.

According to Mann, "This could be a threat or an opportunity, 
depending on the nature of their proposals."


*NEWS IN BRIEF.

*7: TOUCHY-FEELY: A new web site, 'ifeelpixel,' created by a 
group of specialist companies and organisations, is offering a test 
version of software which will allow users to 'feel' images on the 
screen using tactile mice. A second test version is due before 
Christmas. For system requirements and to download a copy, see:
http://www.ifeelpixel.com/download 

*8: CUSTOMER SERVICE: E-Access Bulletin is interested in hearing 
from any of our UK-based visually impaired readers on experiences 
they have had in buying computers, mobile phones or any pieces of 
technology or gadgets from high street chain stores. Are the staff 
properly trained to handle enquiries about access issues? Please email 
the editor Dan Jellinek on dan@headstar.com

*9: OPEN LEARNING: Draft guidelines to help developers create 
online learning packages suitable for the visually impaired and those 
with other disabilities was published late last month by the 
international standards body IMS Global Learning:
http://www.imsproject.org/accessibility/accessiblevers
The guidelines were debated at the first meeting of the UK's 'CETIS' 
higher education standards body's accessibility group in Salford this 
week:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/cetis 

*10: TELLY ADDICTS: Visually impaired people are being invited to 
assist with research at City University in London into their television 
usage and the problems they encounter. The research team is keen to 
try out its voice-activated alternative to the on-screen guides which 
pose access problems for digital television users. Those interested 
should contact Fraser Hamilton on f.m.hamilton@city.ac.uk

[Section one ends.]


*11: SPECIAL NOTICE: Techshare 2002 Conference
- Minister for Disabled People and E-envoy to speak.

This major international conference, organised by the Royal National 
Institute of the Blind, will take place on 21-22 November at the 
International Convention Centre, Birmingham, UK.

Techshare is for anyone with an interest in how technology facilitates 
independent access to education, employment, lifelong learning and 
society for blind and partially sighted people. Maria Eagle, Minister for 
Disability will be opening the conference and a new key speaker 
Andrew Pinder, the E-envoy has just been confirmed. They will join 
Heinz Wolff, TV celebrity and Professor of Bioengineering at Brunel 
and Ian Pearson, BT's Futurologist as our key speakers for this year. 
Delegates will also have the opportunity to visit a wide range of 
exhibitors. For more see:
http://www.techshare.org.uk
email: techshare@rnib.org.uk or telephone (inside UK) 0870 013 9555 
or outside UK +44 0121 665 4230

{Special notice ends.]


* SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

*12: AWARDS ANALYSED: E-Government Bulletin reader Ian 
Lloyd writes in with a personal assessment of the sites which were 
short-listed for the first ever British Academy of Film and Television 
Arts accessibility awards (http://fastlink.headstar.com/bafta ) (see also 
news, last month and this issue).

"I was somewhat surprised, they were a mixed bag," he said. "The first 
finalist - the UK Audio Network - was exactly the kind of innovative 
use of sound that I would expect to get a well deserved pat on the back. 
However the second, I-map [the eventual winner], was not exactly 
intuitive. For example, the page title - 'Welcome' – begged the 
question, welcome to what exactly? Tabbing through the links gave 
me: 'Introduction' (again, to what I ask?) and so on.

"Nomination three was Foodlink, which has a nice clean design, but 
again faults were spotted. For example, the options labelled 1 to 4 were 
not read out in sequence, and some of the 'alt' tag attributes were 
incorrect. Nomination four is the BBC's 'Ouch!' site. Anyway, the first 
thing that greeted me was 'homepage' as the page's title tag. It would 
be much nicer as 'home page' – two separate words - so the screen 
reader pronounced it correctly, instead of 'hommapuj'. Until we have 
greater control over pronunciation, I would suggest breaking words 
like these into two words that the screen reader understands.

"In the body of the page, there were some links that could have 
benefited from some additional help in the form of a title attribute - in 
particular the links that were people's names. In defence of Ouch, with 
several updates a week it's understandable that the occasional title 
attribute gets missed out. All in all though, is this the best in 
accessibility? I am not so sure." [Further comments to 
inbox@headstar.com]


*13: EMAIL CRAZY: Computer science student Sabahattin 
Gucukoglu, also the author of a feature in this week's bulletin, has 
further information about accessing the internet by email, following 
our piece last issue on Google's new email search option.

"There are many good reasons to use email only to do everything on 
the internet," he says. "Some users in third-world countries or with 
otherwise limited-bandwidth connections, or those in organisations 
which provide email only, have no other option. Others find that 
waiting on a connection to an outside server is best left up to a robot, 
keeping them from lagging online.

"It also brings immense benefits to the blind, especially to those who 
enjoyed the older operating systems or using portable devices. Some 
just find that the format of the e-mail is more appealing in plain text 
than as presented in their browsers.

"A wealth of information on this topic called "ACCMail" (Access by 
Mail), including an email list and a frequently asked questions (FAQ) 
document, has been assembled by retired IBM programmer Gerald 
Boyd at:
http://www.expita.com 


*14: LIMITED ACCESS: A bulletin reader the US, Jim Corcoran, who 
lives in upstate New York, has some further telling comments on 
internet access: "As you are probably aware, many visually impaired 
people are living on a fixed low income and if they are lucky enough to 
have a computer as I am, may not be able to afford internet access as 
another monthly charge on a limited income.

"There are several free email accounts out there such as I'm using 
which have extremely limited or no internet access. Therefore, links 
are almost useless. Most people assume we have unlimited internet 
access. Not so."


*15: REMOTE CONTROL: Tracy Duckett, a sixth-former from 
Leighton Buzzard, would like assistance from bulletin readers for a 
school project to design and make a remote control for a radio to be 
used by blind or partially sighted people. "I would like to receive any 
relevant ideas for example materials to use, how the buttons are 
shaped, or Braille samples." Please email her directly on:
tracy.duckett.freedom@02.co.uk


*16: PERUVIAN PROJECT: Gina Bardelli of Peru, a regular reader, 
writes: "I would like to identify sources of assistance to create an 
information and communications centre for the blind in Lima, Peru. I 
work as deputy director for youth and education services in the local 
authority of one of the districts of Lima, San Borja. Among the tasks in 
my remit is the running of the district library, through which we strive 
to provide services to the blind in the form of talking books or through 
sighted readers for those visually impaired people who need a more 
individualised service.

"We have obtained a demo of the IBM Home Page Reader which we 
have installed in a computer terminal connected to internet. However 
this service has serious limitations and we aim at creating, with the 
help of volunteers a high quality service for visually impaired people. I 
hope I can get helpful advice or assistance to turn our dream into 
reality." [Responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


*17: GENEROUS ALLOWANCE? Our focus last issue on access to 
learning (story 13, section four, September issue), and specifically our 
coverage of the disabled students allowance (DSA), struck a chord 
with several readers.

Steve Brazier from Nottingham said: "I am visually impaired and 
began an Open University Course in February, aiming for a diploma in 
German. I was sent the DSA forms and filled them in, not expecting 
too much. I had already taught myself to use a PC and had access 
software.

"I was assessed at Lincoln University's DART centre in January. 
Although I didn't think I needed much, the centre not only 
recommended a laptop but also an upgrade to most of my existing 
system. They also recommended specialist learning software that 
meant I could scan in text and abstract vocabulary - something I had 
been helped with before by my wife reading marked up textbooks out 
while I touch-typed everything into the PC, which took hours.

"The whole list was approved and I got the new equipment in April. It 
has been extremely valuable and has made me more or less totally 
independent in my studies. Most impressive was the way they saw 
through my 'modest' request and realised I was just getting by before. I 
hope this may be of interest in persuading other VI students to fill in 
the form."

However, not all students have had good experiences. Jane Fleming of 
Whittlesey said: "I am a UK postgraduate, part-time, doing an MA in 
Urban Geography at London External (correspondence part of 
University of London). I do not receive a penny in DSA, nor any help 
from the extensive student support part of the Senate. The only 
assistance I have had is the grant from the RNIB to upgrade my screen-
reader software. Students come in all shapes, abilities and sizes."


[Section two ends].


*18: SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- TECHNOLOGY AT HOME.

SMART LIVING.
by Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

Imagine waking up in the morning and using a single control panel by 
the bed to make a phone call; turn the radio on; start the bath running 
(safe in  the knowledge the taps will turn themselves off at the right 
time); and switch on the kettle. Welcome to life in a smart home.

As well as convenience, smart technologies have the potential to make 
the home a much safer and more convenient place for people with 
visual impairments. Audio interfaces, for example, could tell a user 
when the bath is too hot or give audio prompts when the oven is left 
on.

On leaving the house, a signal from a key fob could turn on the 
security alarm, close any open windows, and make sure all the doors 
are locked. If there is a gas leak, or if a ring on the cooker blows out, 
detectors in the house would turn the gas off at the mains activating a 
warning alarm. In addition, any of the features of a smart home could 
eventually be linked to the internet via wireless connections, and hence 
be accessed by or communicate with a user via mobile phone or 
workplace computer.

The John Grooms housing association 
(http://www.johngrooms.org.uk), a charity providing 1,200 accessible 
homes to people with disabilities, is optimistic about the future of 
smart homes. "Technology will get cheaper. We are always pushing 
for councils to be more aware of the needs of their disabled 
constituents. I think it should take off in the next few years," a 
spokesperson said.

A jointly funded smart homes project with Portsmouth City Council, 
Portsmouth University and John Grooms has seen the development of 
six two-bed flats, three with full smart technology and three partly 
developed and adapted to individual needs, at the north end of the city. 
Presently, none of these cater for people with visual impairment 
specifically but have many functions which could be of benefit to this 
group.

Rather than twisting taps, for example, a pre-programmed button can 
measure out exactly how much water you need to fill a cup. Doors can 
recognise when they are obstructed, and entrance systems do not 
require awkward locks.

Social smart homes are not widely available, however, and roll out of 
non-commercial applications in housing is slow. Dr John Gill, chief 
scientist at the Royal National Institute for the Blind, told E-Access 
Bulletin: "The industry is beset by lack of a single standard for the 
network – currently there are a vast number of different competing and 
incompatible systems."

Gill says retrofitting an old house is a "nightmare" due to excessive 
cabling. The life expectancy of technology is another problem for 
people with disabilities because users would expect the system to stay 
current for at least 10-15 years, whereas the suppliers could update or 
switch systems within a year.

"Demand for the government to scrap analogue TV and switch to 
digital may help the roll out of smart technologies in the home because 
the common standard used for the TV will be used for everything 
else," he said.

The Joseph Rowntree Foundation 
(http://www.jrf.org.uk/housingtrust/smarthomes) in conjunction with 
Sussex University (http://fastlink.headstar.com/smart), are currently 
running a series of demonstration projects with disabled people to 
assess reliability of available smart technologies in the home.

According to the foundation's policy and practice manager Julie 
Cowans, "smart technologies have a huge potential role if suppliers 
and manufacturers can get to grips with the user interface thing. The 
devices are not all user friendly yet – you need a degree in computer 
programming to operate some of this stuff."

Another problem is cost, Cowans says. "Suppliers and installers give 
bespoke systems to each user and they are incredibly expensive – the 
industry looks to the commercial entertainment market where there's a 
wealth of products available but they've drawn a blank with the 
domestic market.  A housing association would struggle to find a 
realistic way to support the costs," she says.

"Five years down the line things will get better, when it becomes less 
of a niche market. Currently the very biggest players like BT, Siemens 
and Echelon feel that the market is not mature enough to devote 
resources to," she says.

An example of one of the foundation's projects in conjunction with 
Edinvar housing association is the Edinvar flat in Edinburgh 
(http://www.gdewsbury.ukideas.com/Edinvarflatplan.html). The 
organisation is also in talks with York University about the creation of 
a national centre of home automation.

Even once the technology is 100 per cent reliable, for smart housing in 
a social context to grow in the UK as it has in certain northern 
European countries, the government may need to be convinced that 
savings in institutional care can offset hardware and support costs.

One US smart homes company, Automated Living 
(http://www.automatedliving.com), prides itself in the apparent 
simplicity of its voice technology products. "Someone who is not 
sighted would need help setting the system up, but it's so simple to do 
even somebody's mother could do it. Our systems do not rely on 
dictation technology but use speaker independent technology 
programmed with a very narrow syntax, which drives down the margin 
for error," a spokesman said. The company's most expensive product 
is 399 US dollars.

However the Rowntree foundation's experience has been very 
different, says Cowans. "There are a lot of exciting things in the 
pipeline with voice technologies and voice activated systems but we 
felt things were still a little too unreliable. It took one of the people in 
the demo 50 hours to get used to the system he trialled, and then he got 
a cold and it couldn't recognise his voice."

[Section three ends.]


*19: SECTION FOUR: VIEWPOINT
- THE DEVELOPING WORLD.

DIVIDED WE STAND.
by DPM Weerakkody  dpmw@mail.pdn.ac.lk

The prospect of further globalisation makes it imperative that visually 
impaired people, regardless of their nationality, have access to 
technology allowing them to operate on equal terms with their sighted 
counterparts. But achieving this will be tough, particularly in 
developing countries, home to some 90 per cent of the world's visually 
impaired people, according to the World Health Organisation, with 
over nine million living in India; six million in China and seven 
million in Africa.

Screen magnification tools, Braille displays and embossers, and 
specially designed input devices have made it possible for visually 
impaired people to use computers, offering unprecedented possibilities 
in education, employment and recreation. But, for most visually 
impaired people, the costs of obtaining and using such devices remain 
prohibitively high, not least because of the added cost of training and 
software upgrades.

It follows that those from poorer countries are faced with the biggest 
problems, made worse by the fact that visually impaired people in 
developing countries tend come from the more economically 
disadvantaged backgrounds.

Among the most costly items of access technology are Braille writing 
equipment and high tech devices, such as Braille displays and 
embossers. It is not true, as some would say, that these devices are of 
no special use to a blind person unless he were also deaf. As a 
university lecturer, for instance, I find it extremely awkward to read 
teaching notes or record research interviews using synthetic speech. 
Furthermore, hard copy Braille is too inflexible to permit regular 
updating or adaptation to unplanned classroom conditions.

Even with hard copy Braille, the source of literacy for thousands, costs 
have risen astronomically in recent years, partly as a result of people in 
the West switching to audio technology. Hard copy Braille is supplied 
to users in the developed world a price well above the cost price 
charged by Western organisations, such as the RNIB, who continue to 
offer generous discounts to local readers. Nevertheless the majority of 
the Braille community in the developing world cannot afford to adopt 
the alternatives.

As a Classics professor at the University of Peradeniya in Sri Lanka 
(http://www.pdn.ac.lk), I am fortunate to receive a salary of around 
200 UK pounds a month which I have saved to purchase the equipment 
I need. Even with my salary, however, I have only been able to do this 
because I have been prepared to sacrifice many other good things of 
life which money could buy. 

The equipment I use includes two personal computers (one at home 
and one at the office), on Apollo II synthesizer (remember the DOS 
days), HAL and Window-Eyes screen-reader software (with almost 
annual upgrades), a scanner and Open Book Unbound (with upgrades), 
four-track cassette recorders and a Mountbatten Brailler. I have also 
bought a number of multi-volume Greek and Latin books in Braille at 
colossal prices, and whatever I could not purchase I have copied with 
my own hands from less than perfect dictations by sighted persons 
whom I pay.

I do not approve of what many people do in India, namely to take 
software like JAWS and Kurzweil Reader, pirate them, and sell them 
to blind people at a tenth of the retail price. I have done whatever I can 
to stop people in Sri Lanka from pirating access software. I have been 
successful so far, but the result is that only a handful of people have 
computers with HAL. 

All in all then, at present, access technology is an unaffordable and so 
ultimately frustrating experience for the great majority of visually 
impaired people in the developing world

[Section four ends.]


*20: SECTION FIVE: HIGHER EDUCATION
- COURSE SELECTION.

EXTRA HOMEWORK REQUIRED.
by Sabahattin Gucukoglu

Like many blind people, in choosing a university to attend I was drawn 
to the ideal projected by my favoured institution of integration, 
involvement and equality with my non-disabled peers. Failure in my 
fresher's year as a computer science student, however, has led me to 
doubt the decision-making process that many, perhaps most, visually 
impaired people use when choosing where to study.

There are too many factors contributing to my downfall to describe 
them all here. But high among them is that the 'gut reaction' which 
informed my choice of university and course was inappropriate. 

Like most would-be students, my choice of university was made 
largely on the grounds of personal preferences, false assurances and a 
lack of attention to the detail given in the prospectus. But, I have 
learned, going through this standard decision-making process is not 
necessarily enough for a visually impaired person. To maximise the 
chances of success, you need to do more than examine the paperwork 
and attend a few routine meetings about your special needs.

One must be cautious in basing one's decision on the apparent 
helpfulness of a special needs assessment. I have learned that it may 
have little to do with the university's provision once you are there. My 
own assessment was very promising, but I soon discovered you are 
pretty much out in the wild once it is over. Alarm bells too should ring 
if you hear that your department and your special needs group hardly 
talk to each other, because it is crucial they are in close co-operation.

Be wary too if you are hear that exceptional intelligence is the only 
thing which will pull you through. If, like me, you are optimistic and 
obliging, you might find yourself working unduly hard just to prove an 
inadequate course is actually okay. I'm still trying to figure out whether 
I was wrong or just plain stupid.

To make a proper informed decision you need to scrutinise the detail of 
special needs support on offer and listen to the experiences of other 
students. You, like me, must realise you are not the only one to have 
had these experiences.

The consensus among the visually impaired students I talked to was 
that universities either understand their needs or they do not. For 
example, a university needs to know how visually impaired people 
digest course material. Rather than have an explanation flashed up in 
front of them like sighted person, visually impaired students would 
often prefer to have it all there and read it at a later stage. If these 
requirements are known before a visually impaired student arrives, 
they would not be difficult to arrange.

Despite my misgivings, however, I am pleased to say my university is 
showing signs that it is motivated to change. It is working in response 
to the extension of the Disability Discrimination Act to education and 
it has bought in expensive technology and promised to make things 
work for me. They have offered me a place on an e-business course 
which it is hoped will present less obstacles to accessibility.

In my opinion, my failure was the price of being a guinea pig, and I 
will remain sceptical about the idea that any organisation proposing to 
help people with disabilities can guarantee anything.

[Section five ends.]


* HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject 
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be 
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access 
bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

* PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

[Issue ends.]
