* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment.
Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute of the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid for screen readers, all headings begin with 
an asterisk and end with a full stop. All items are also now numbered 
in the contents and throughout the issue, with numbers appearing 
immediately after the asterisks. Please let us know if there is anything 
else we can do to make navigation easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 33, SEPTEMBER 2002.

* CONTENTS:

Section one: News.

1: Government 'losing momentum on disability'
- no vote this parliamentary session.

2: Landmark settlement for e-voters
- Washington rethink on technology.

3: And the winner is . . .
- web awards embrace accessibility.

4: Search the web by email
- new Google services.

5: A medal for Bill Gates
- Microsoft founder wins Canadian award.

6: 'Talking Link' postpones launch
- funding hiccup slows down project.

News in brief: 7: Web Pulse – portable browser launch; 8: Electronic 
assistance – technology guide for the elderly; 9: Living free –London 
exhibition.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
- 10: Flash features; 11: Design bombshell.

12: Section three: Opinion - web design.
- Out of the ghetto: is text the only way to make electronic media 
accessible to visually impaired people? Kevin Carey argues for a true 
multimedia approach.

13: Section four: Focus - student services.
- Access to learning: many new students who are visually impaired 
face the hurdle of finding help, advice and extra equipment. Tamara 
Fletcher reports.

14: Section five: Writing competition – runner up.
Love grows over the wires, by Estelita Clayton.

[Contents ends.]


* SECTION ONE: NEWS.


*1: GOVERNMENT 'LOSING MOMENTUM' ON DISABILITY.

A government bill that would bring discrimination law more closely 
in line with legislation covering race, gender and religion looks set to 
be sidelined, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

According to the RNIB, the bill was designed to implement 
recommendations made by the Department of Work and Pensions 
Disability Rights Task Force (http://www.disability.gov.uk/drtf) and 
was expected in the Commons during the new parliamentary session. 
However, Caroline Ellis of the RNIB said this is now highly unlikely 
and the RNIB and Disability Rights Commission will now lobby 
sympathetic MPs to sponsor a Private Members Bill. 

“When they’re not moving on these issues swiftly, the questions has 
to be – why not?” she said. “It’s a big blow. It looks like the 
government is losing momentum on disability.”

The government set up the Disability Rights Task Force in 1997 to 
advise on how to deliver its election pledges to the disabled, and 
initially appeared to support its conclusions 
(http://www.disability.gov.uk/drtf/towards_inclusion).

Accordingly, the new bill was expected to strengthen the Disability 
Discrimination Act and Special Educational Needs and Disability 
Act, both of which have been criticised by the RNIB and the 
Disability Rights Commission (http://fastlink.headstar.com/drc).

However, these plans now appear to have been sidelined. And 
concern over the slow progress on disability legislation has been 
heightened by government plans to replace the Disability Rights 
Commission with a single watchdog for all anti-discrimination laws 
(see Issue 30, June 2002).


*2: LANDMARK SETTLEMENT FOR E-VOTERS.

The Council of the District of Columbia (http://www.dc.gov), the 
local authority which runs the US capital Washington DC, has settled 
a legal dispute with disability campaigners by agreeing to install 
accessible voting equipment in all its polling stations by 2004.

The settlement (http://www.aapd-
dc.org/docs/landmarksettledcvotemach.html) ends a landmark legal 
action which claimed that plans for new electronic voting machines 
violated the Disabilities Act of 1990.

The local authority had planned to introduce an optical vote-counting 
system that required voters to mark ballot papers with a pencil. 
However, a coalition that included the American Association of 
People with Disabilities (http://www.aapd-dc.org) and the Disability 
Rights Council of Greater Washington argued that the equipment 
prevented people with impaired vision and motor skills from voting in 
secrecy. 

In each polling station the authorities will now provide a voting 
machine with both audio and touch-screen capability. For a visually 
impaired person, the machines produce an audio reading of the ballot 
through headphones. Voters select a candidate using arrow keys 
identified in Braille, while the touch-screen can be accessed with any 
part of the hand or a mouth stick. Voters can also spell the names of 
candidates by saying letters out loud. 

The new machines will be demonstrated in local elections this 
autumn, but will not be used to cast actual votes until 2004.


*3: AND THE WINNER IS . . .

Accessible web sites are being recognised for the first time this year 
at the annual Interactive Entertainment Awards of the British 
Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA - 
http://www.bafta.org).

The judges will present the award to entertainment or information 
sites which best exemplify a 'design for all' approach.

BAFTA awards administrator Duncan Best said that in future the 
accessibility criterion might be applied to all entries into the 
competition. At present, however, media such as digital television, 
mobile phones and text messaging cannot be judged on this basis. 
"The technology is not going to be here for the next year and a half," 
Best said.

RNIB campaigns officer Julie Howell, one of the award's judges, 
said: "RNIB hopes BAFTA will incorporate accessibility into 
essential judging criteria for every category in 2003. Accessibility 
effects everyone at some time, so the issue should be regarded as 
mainstream."

For details of the four sites which have been nominated for the 
accessibility award - the UK Audio Network; I-Map; Foodlink; and 
Ouch! – see:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/bafta


*4: SEARCH THE WEB BY EMAIL.

A service allowing people to use highly accessible text email to 
search the web using the popular search engine 'Google' has had 
nearly 60,000 users in the five months since its launch.

The bulk of those using the service are likely to have done so because 
the smaller connection time it requires means searching is cheaper or 
because it enables them to search easily using handheld devices.

However, the service has found favour among blind people, who find 
their screen readers work better with text email than the Google web 
page.

One frequent user told E-Access Bulletin, "I have used it quite a lot, 
but then I also find the web page quite easy to use also." He did 
however find fault with the system because it only returns up to about 
20 matches.

The service is run by web software firm Cape Clear 
(http://www.capeclear.com). To use it, send a query in the subject 
heading of an email to:
google@capeclear.com


*5: A MEDAL FOR BILL GATES.

Micorsoft founder Bill Gates was awarded a Louis Braille Gold 
Medal in Toronto last month in recognition of Microsoft Canada's 
support for a digital library system developed by the Canadian 
National Institute for the Blind (CNIB - http://www.cnib.ca/library). 
Development will begin on the system in October, and it is hoped to 
be fully functional within a year.

The project includes development of a Children's Discovery Portal – 
an online community for visually impaired children consisting of the 
CNIB library, accessible games, a community area and a news 
section. Using audio and voice technology, children will be able to 
search the library database and download materials, play games and 
chat with other visually impaired and sighted children.

Independent accessibility consultant Joe Clark, who attended the 
presentation, said: “The award was deserved, but Bill Gates shouldn't 
have been the recipient; it should have been the Microsoft 
accessibility group.

"Interestingly though, Bill did commit to spending the rest of his 
career advancing the needs of blind people. Perhaps we should hold 
him to that?”


*6: 'TALKING LINK' POSTPONES LAUNCH.

Talking Link, a project developing technology for accessible internet 
services including innovative audio and search capabilities (see E-
Access Bulletin, March 2002), has postponed its September launch 
due to lack of funds.

The project's Lanacashire-based former owner, the Link Group, went 
into voluntary liquidation in August. A new company formed to take 
on the work, Deck12, remains confident in the strength of its portal 
technology and is continuing to seek new funding. It is also keen to 
begin development work on an accessible games project.

“The idea is to develop accessible games that are also interesting to – 
for want of a better word – 'ordinary' people,” said Deck12 
spokesman Richard Buchanan. “But in total, we’ve invested a quarter 
of a million pounds of our own money in the technology and we need 
financial backing if we are to move forward."

The company has formed a partnership with Disability World 
(http://www.disabilityworld.com), a provider of online guides and 
healthcare information for the disabled.


*NEWS IN BRIEF.

*7: WEB PULSE: Pulse Data is set to launch a portable web browser, 
'KeyWeb', which will be available as a hardware or software upgrade 
to the New Zealand company's BrailleNote and VoiceNote portable 
notetaker products. The browser is designed to give visually impaired 
people access to the internet without having to use a computer and 
screen reader, and can be used to access search engines and fill in 
online forms:
http://www.pulsedata.co.nz/handlers/display.cfm/4,420,18,24,html


*8: ELECTRONIC ASSISTANCE: The Centre for Accessible 
Environments is to launch a ‘Specifiers guide on electronic assistive 
technology in the home for older and disabled people,’ including 
profiles of successful commercially available ‘smart’ products. 
Aimed at home improvement agencies, health professionals, local 
authority housing departments and architects, the publication is 
expected on 25 November:
http://www.cae.org.uk


*9: LIVING FREE: More than 150 manufacturers, healthcare 
specialists, architects and surveyors will be attending the Independent 
Living London Show in Wembley on 18 and 19 September. The 
show, which is free to visitors, will also offer seminars on consumer 
issues and sports and fitness:
http://www.independentlivingevents.co.uk

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

* FLASH FEATURES:  In our last issue, Kate Page of English 
Nature asked if pop-up menus created using web animation software 
Macromedia Fireworks are accessible using JAWS 4.0. Robin 
Christopherson of AbilityNet replies: “I don't think JAWS will work 
with Fireworks at all. My understanding is that the latest version of 
JAWS, 4.5, works well with presentations created using the latest 
version of Flash - Flash MX - but not with previous versions.

“I don't believe that Fireworks, or even the latest version Fireworks 
MX, offers the same accessibility and there's no mention of it doing 
so on their website at http://www.macromedia.com, where they do 
talk at length about what Flash MX can offer.”

* DESIGN BOMBSHELL:  Brian Payne, an accessibility trainer and 
creator of Brailtalk, a way for sighted people to communicate in 
Braille (http://www.brailletalk.btinternet.co.uk), writes in with some 
comments on our story on a digital speech and voice solution to 
television programme guides (see ‘Open vista for digital television’, 
Story 3, E-Access Bulletin, August 2002).

“Being totally without eyesight myself, I was interested in this 
project, but the implications go far beyond television. I have long 
hoped that someone would develop a ‘common box’ for analysing 
digital displays on such equipment as treadmills and other gymnasium 
devices, digital radios, fridge-freezers, other household items and, of 
course, television.

“Manufacturers continue to develop flat, smooth touch pads for those 
with sight to access numbers, letters and instructions. I am assured by 
others that such pads do not in any sense make the final products 
more beautiful in their appearance, so this gives me a small hope that 
such things will be dropped one day in acknowledgment of those who 
cannot read them.

“Cynically, however, I have to admit that I am probably wrong 
because, vision being our most powerful sense, it follows logically 
that most things will be developed with the eye in mind.”

[Section two ends].


*12: SECTION THREE: OPINION
- WEB DESIGN

* OUT OF THE GHETTO.
by Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

The RNIB's campaign for good web design recently hosted a debate 
in London on web accessibility and usability. I wasn't there, but I 
understand that the assembled panel of 'experts' were split over the 
question as to whether a site can be designed to meet all needs or 
whether blind and visually impaired people need a place of their own, 
a text ghetto.

It seems from the outside that these experts, like most web designers, 
know a heap about what they do themselves, but nothing about the 
market for which they are supposed to be doing it. Of those who 
could be registered legally blind in the United Kingdom, only a 
fraction - certainly less than ten per cent - totally rely on braille or 
audio and have no residual vision. And that is quite apart from those 
with vision better than 6/60 who are classified as partially sighted.

All of these people - the vast majority of the RNIB client base - need 
an environment in which text, audio and yes, pictures, are mutually 
supportive. So are we to stick with "the text, the whole text and 
nothing but the text" or go for a new slogan: "Multimedia must be 
multimodal"?

I suggest the latter. When people with standard sight and hearing sit 
in front of a television they don't choose a primary receptive medium, 
turning off either the sound or the picture, so why should people with 
poor vision be any different?

On the other hand they might find, on occasion, that they want text so 
large that they shift the picture off the screen, or conversely, they 
might be grateful for a graph which shows a broad trend, saving them 
acres of technical text. 

Furthermore, at the root of this controversy there is one massive 
fallacy: that hypertext is just a minor digital variant on analogue text. 
The basic concepts behind hypertext are not new – indeed it could be 
argued that they were developed as far back as the 1690s by Gottfried 
Leibniz, one of the first thinkers to conceive of a perfect language 
which obeyed logical principles and in which sentences were 
conceptually interlinked. It is staggering, therefore, that most 
contemporary web designers and users don't understand what it is, 
and still, for example, array options in trees and menus. This 
approach is anathema to the basic concept of hypertext, which is that 
one item can have a wide variety of attributes.

It is with this in mind that I advocate building web sites using the 
plasticity of hypertext to allow blind and visually impaired people to 
choose what they want instead of shunting them off into an 
informational and psychological ghetto.

If you want to see how useless this ghetto strategy can be you only 
have to try to read the BBC Home Page with a screen reader. Last 
time I looked it had 103 live links, more than half of which had to be 
trawled through before I reached the links for the main channels. It's 
difficult to beat a good top line legend to help you jump around a 
page and this is much better for people with poor vision than shunting 
them off into a world of black and white.

On top of the ridiculous architectural metaphor of web 'sites' and the 
printing metaphor of 'pages' we now have the even sillier 'one size fits 
all' proposition.

The whole point about the web and its rendering in digital 
technologies is that there isn't one size but only, in the first instance, 
the author's preferred rendering. Indeed, splitting style from content 
and using a browser is a quintessential exercise in user preferenced 
rendering, so what is this debate about?

Not for the first time, it is really a power game between liberals and 
authoritarians, between those who make their living by telling people 
what to do and those who make their living by making it possible for 
people to do things. I know which side I'm on.

[Section three ends.]


*13: SECTION FOUR: FOCUS
- HIGHER EDUCATION.

* ACCESS TO LEARNING.
by Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

Along with all the other concerns of a newly-enrolled student, 
visually impaired people entering university must also ensure they 
have the technical and personal support they need.

To assist them, a network of 34 specialist access centres has been 
established across the country. These offer independent assessment 
for students wanting to apply for the disabled students allowance 
(DSA) which helps pay for training and assistive technologies needed 
to complete their studies. 

The DSA can total up to 4,300 pounds as an assistive hardware and 
software allowance over the duration of a course, but this is largely 
dependent on the assessment report drawn up by the access centres 
and sent to the local education authority. The authority will then 
either fund the recommended assistance themselves or issue funding 
direct to the individual if they are eligible.

More than 1,250 visually impaired students entered university in the 
last academic year.


Maxine Kemp, administrator at the National Federation of Access 
Centres (NFAC - http://www.nfac.org.uk) says: “When a student 
applies to university and indicates they have a disability, the 
admissions department will inform the disability service and we 
would then invite them to their local centre and if necessary, apply for 
the DSA for them.”

The centres assess the needs of each individual, covering everything 
from the equipment a student will need to technology training and 
personal support. The centres undertake 75 per cent of all disability 
assessments in England and Wales. The remaining 25 per cent are 
assessed by private organisations.

Sussex University is one example of an institution with an access 
centre set up on campus. The centre here was established with 
funding set up in memory of Sally Marriott, the University's former 
deputy personnel manager who dedicated much of her career to 
helping students with disabilities.

In 2000 a new Visual Impairment Unit was established at Sussex with 
funding from the University and the Blatchington Court Trust  
(http://freespace.virgin.net/blatchington.court), a local charity 
promoting education and employment for visually impaired young 
people in Sussex. Last year the unit assessed 23 visually impaired 
students from all over the country who were looking to attend a 
university in the South.

The centre's assessor Argie Labib, who is himself visually impaired, 
said the assessments help different people in different ways. “Nearly 
all visually impaired students work with computers and we can 
recommend things for their studies. Some are not aware of what’s 
available and we have access to all the latest technology and carry out 
research to find out what works with what and what doesn’t work.”

One student who has been helped by an access centre is Saqib Shaikh, 
who lost his sight when he was seven years old and is in his second 
year at Essex university studying as an undergraduate in Computer 
Science. The Middlesex access centre carried out his initial 
assessment and sent it to the disability support unit in Essex 
University who signed and verified it and helped him in many ways.

“Our disability coordinator, while she has little money to spend on 
disability, is very helpful and will always try to do her best to get the 
right things done. She listens to what I want, and tries to provide it, 
and there's no bureaucracy and red tape to get through,” says Shaikh.

“Being a computer scientist, I just told them what I needed, and they 
agreed. They also helped me interview potential readers, and a non-
academic helper for laundry, shopping and so on. They liaised with 
the Computer Science department to make them aware of the 
situation. They help by sorting out applying for DSA - the university 
pays and then claims it back from the local education authority.”

Shaikh uses scanning software to read books and letters, a note taker 
for making notes and a four-track tape recorder for listening to taped 
text books. He relies on his computer for work, internet research and 
communicating by email. “I couldn't exist without it,” he says.

[Section four ends.]


*: SECTION FIVE: WRITING COMPETITION
- RUNNER UP.

The following story by Estelita Clayton has won second place in our 
competition for creative writing on the topic 'keeping in touch with 
technology' (the first prize story, by Neill McBride, was published in 
our last issue). The other runners-up were Marvin Atkins; Husna 
Begum; Amiyo Biswas; Peter Davey; Billie Jean Keith; Patricia 
Livingstone; Dave Reynolds; and Jerry Weichbrodt, each of whom 
will receive a set of classic e-books on CD.

* LOVE GROWS OVER THE WIRES.
by Estelita Clayton

My story started over 40 years ago when, at the age of 18 months old, 
I lost my sight.

Living in the Philippines and going through school was very difficult 
with no technology aids to help me cope with my studies, but I 
successfully graduated and earned a college degree in teaching. With 
the help of generous people I was able to get a job as a schoolteacher 
by teaching Braille to blind children.

Later on I got married and my husband, who was also blind, took me 
to live in Canada, where the way of living was different. There I 
learnt how to use a computer with an early voice synthesis machine 
called DECtalk (http://www.fonix.com/products/dectalk) and JAWS 
software. As a first timer, I found my computer amazing as it can do 
wonders. It fired my interest to learn more and enjoy finding new 
things that I could do.

After a short time, I lost my husband. I was left alone, and having to 
rely on a few friends to help me when they could, I was very lonely. I 
had my computer to use to while away the time. I started working on 
correspondence courses from Hadley School for the Blind 
(http://www.hadley-school.org). The tutors were very helpful.

Then I ventured out on to the internet and found it interesting. I made 
internet friends to chat with till I found a pen pal from thousands of 
miles away in the UK to exchange email with. With his help online I 
learned more how to navigate around the web and found many new 
things to do with computers.

Meanwhile, I decided to take a year long course at college. By this 
time, I had progressed from the desktop to a laptop, which gave me 
more freedom and confidence to go through college. My pen pal was 
still there online to help me with my computer related problems and 
to teach me some of my course's assignments. I called him my 'techie 
guy'. By the time I was halfway to finish my course, we realised we 
were falling in love with each other and decided to meet after I 
finished the school. When the school was over I had passed the course 
with excellent grades.  The long awaited time for me to meet my 
techie guy was over and soon I was on my way to meet him.
 
By September 2001 we were married and enjoying our life together 
and learning more about computers. My guy is sighted so he has 
learnt how to use all types of different programs with Access 
Technology and then teaches me how to do it. I continued with the 
Hadley courses and one of the courses I took recently was 
Introduction to Personal Computer, which I earned excellent grade of 
A+. So I am learning more each day. 

Technology has helped to change my life for the better, without it my 
life would have been very different. I can only imagine life will get 
even better in the future for the visually impaired and the deafblind.

[Section five ends.]


* HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. 
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject 
header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2002 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
ISSN 1476-6337
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be 
quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access 
bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

* PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

[Issue ends.]
