+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 40, APRIL 2003.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.e-accessibility.com).

Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk)
and National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard. For example, all items are numbered. For details see:
http://www.headstar.com/ten


++ISSUE 40 CONTENTS.

01: 'Thin client' accessibility breakthrough
- Leading suppliers work towards solutions.

02: Design flaws detected in 'driving licence' test
- European standard under the microscope.

03: Disability commission to survey the web
- 1,000 sites to be reviewed.

04: Equality resource for universities
- Assistance for lecturers with disabilities.

05: Cynthia says
- Launch of web access tool.

News in brief: 06: Prize exhibits - museum web awards; 07: Literary
exchange - online computer books; 08:
Meeting standards - policy analysis.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
09: Correct reference - terminology debate; 10: Rectangular response -
cursor advice; 11: Purse-friendly printer - Braille query; 12: Bounce
back again - correction.

Section three: Interview - Jakob Nielsen.
- 13: A fat lot of usability: The web's leading usability and access
guru talks exclusively to E-Access
Bulletin about the poor record of online public services worldwide.

Section four: Opinion - government policy.
-14: Out of focus: Disability discrimination and universal access
policy could be set to fragment as the civil
service is reshuffled. Kevin Carey  reports.

Section five: Viewpoint - career paths.
-15: Stepping ahead: Nolan Crabb charts his eventful journey from
student to successful journalist and
editor, in which he has made access technology work for his career.

[Contents ends.]


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: 'THIN CLIENT' ACCESSIBILITY BREAKTHROUGH.

A breakthrough in screen reader technology could soon allow vision
impaired people to access 'thin client'
computer terminals, the low-memory networked machines which until now
have proved incompatible with
special access technologies, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

Many large organisations are installing 'thin client' networks, where
almost all information and software
applications sits on a central server. The 'thin' machines on users'
desktops are little more than keyboards
and screens, which call out information and software as needed,
enhancing security and cutting costs.

However, the majority of access technology software relies on a fully
functioning desktop computer and will
not function on a 'thin client' terminal. This led the RNIB to warn
last year the phenomenon was in danger of
setting the cause of accessibility back ten to 15 years (see E-Access
Bulletin, issue 37, January 2003).

The breakthrough happened at a meeting between assistive technology
developer GW Micro and
representatives of the RNIB at the March international access
technology conference 'CSUN'
(http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf). At the meeting, GW Micro was able to
demonstrate a fully functioning
prototype of its Window-Eyes screen reader on a computer terminal
running thin client software from Citrix,
E-Access Bulletin has learned.

"This is a significant development. There was no glimpse of a screen
reader that was compatible with this
technology before CSUN," said Ruth Loebl of the RNIB technology
department. According to Loebl, other
assistive technology developers such as Freedom Scientific, maker of
the popular JAWS screen reader, are
also working on products which are compatible with thin client
networks. "We're still some way from
products coming onto the market, but this demonstration is important
because it shows that the problems can
be solved," she said.

UK access software specialist Dolphin Oceanic has also confirmed to
E-Access Bulletin it has developed a
working prototype of a thin-client compatible screen reader. And Loebl
says Microsoft is thought to be
developing accessible thin client server software, "but it's more
difficult to assess progress because its
developers are tied into non-disclosure agreements," said Loebl.


+02: FLAWS DETECTED IN 'DRIVING LICENCE' TEST.

Standard systems for training and examining people for the European
Computer Driving Licence (ECDL -
http://www.ecdl.co.uk), an international test of computer literacy,
have design flaws that could disadvantage
vision impaired users, according to the RNIB.

The licence (http://www.ecdl.co.uk) is a UK version of a European
training standard managed by the British
Computer Society (BCS), consisting of seven online learning modules on
computer basics such as use of
word processing and spreadsheets. It is rapidly being adopted by large
organisations from IBM to the
National Health Service as a minimum standard of IT competence. Tests
can be partially automated, making
it easy to use on a large scale.

The RNIB and other organisations that work with blind people last month
met with representatives of the
BCS and companies that deliver local training, to identify potential
problems with the system.

"So far we've been getting mixed messages, with some blind people
saying they have completed ECDL, and
others saying that parts are not accessible," Zoe Neumann of the RNIB
Technology unit told E-Access
Bulletin. "It needs to be crystal clear where the sticking points are,
so that we can do something about it".

Early feedback suggests that parts of the training and examination
assume that the trainee can use a mouse
unaided, Neumann said. Concern has also been expressed about some of
the formats used for training, such
as PowerPoint. "Some ECDL tests ask the user to change the background
colour on the screen. Using only a
keyboard, this can be very difficult in PowerPoint," she said.

NOTE: Vision impaired readers who have taken an ECDL course are invited
to contact E-Access Bulletin
with their experiences. Please email inbox@headstar.com .


+03: DISABILITY COMMISSION TO SURVEY THE WEB.

The Disability Rights Commission (DRC - http://www.drc-gb.org) is to
conduct a survey of web site
accessibility across England, Scotland and Wales, analysing the causes
of difficulties and recommending
ways to make the web more inclusive.

The investigation will survey the web sites of 1,000 randomly selected
organisations in both the public and
private sectors, testing for compliance with industry accessibility
standards as laid down in the international
Web Accessibility Initiative (http://www.w3.org/WAI). In addition, a
panel of 50 disabled people will take
part in more in-depth testing of a sample of these sites. The
commission will work in collaboration with a
team from the Centre for Human Computer Interaction Design at City
University London (http://www-
hcid.soi.city.ac.uk), led by Professor Helen Petrie.

The project aims to report by the end of 2003, although it will not
identify particular organisations as
examples of good or bad design. "The reason we're conducting this
investigation is because generally, we
suspect that standards of accessibility are quite low, but this is not
about naming and shaming," a DRC
spokesperson said.


+04: EQUALITY RESOURCE FOR UNIVERSITIES.

A new online resource for UK colleges and universities to ensure equal
opportunities for all their staff with
disabilities has been launched by the Equality Challenge Unit, a body
sponsored by the UK higher education
funding and representative bodies to promote equal opportunities.

The site (http://www.ecu.ac.uk) combines policy advice with good
practice recommendations designed to
combat discrimination of all kinds and foster diversity in the higher
education sector. It also draws together
legal resources such as the parts of the Disability Discrimination Act
dealing with employment and
education (http://www.ecu.ac.uk/disability), codes of practice from the
Disability Rights Commission
(http://www.drc-gb.org/campaign/law/code.asp), and useful sources of
technology information such as the
accessible technology in education agency Techdis
(http://www.techdis.ac.uk).

 "This is a significant area of employment - around 345,000 people in
the UK are employed in higher
education," an ECU spokesperson said.

Separately, disability campaign group Skill (http://www.skill.org.uk)
has called on the government to revise
proposals for the new Office for Fair Access, a body that will promote
greater access to colleges and
universities for students from disadvantaged backgrounds. "The
proposals make no mention of disabled
students," Skill said last week.


+05: CYNTHIA SAYS.

An new international group which aims to help addressing the internet
needs of people with special needs
has launched a new free service to evaluate web page accessibility.

The Internet Society Disability and Special Needs chapter
(http://www.isocdisab.org) is the first ever non-
geographical chapter of the society, a free membership organisation
comprised of 11,000 individual and
institutional members from 182 countries.

Together with technology company HiSoftware and the International
Center for Disability Resources on the
Internet (http://www.icdri.org), the chapter has helped develop Cynthia
Says (http://www.cynthiasays.com),
an online web accessibility test similar to the well-known software
Bobby (http://bobby.watchfire.com).

The chapter is currently inviting people to contribute to forthcoming
projects which include the creation of a
member newsletter and the identification of issues it ought to address.

Membership of ISOC and the chapter are free. For ISOC membership see:
http://www.isoc.org/members
And to join the disability and special needs chapter email Michael
Burks on:
mburks952@att.net


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+06: PRIZE EXHIBITS: Nominations are invited by the national Museums
Computer Group for awards to
recognise the most accessible museum web sites, to be presented in
memory of Jodi Mattes, a pioneer in this
field. The adjudicators say they are prepared to recognise worthy sites
of all sizes and budgets:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/mcg1
The presentation will be made at conference on 20 and 21 May marking
the end of the Talking Images
project on the accessibility of museums and galleries:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/talk1

+07: LITERARY EXCHANGE: O'Reilly, the leading computer book publisher,
has reached an agreement
to make accessible copies of its titles available to vision impaired
people in the UK through the US-based
book-sharing platform 'Bookshare.org'. E-Access Bulletin will inform
readers when the service goes live:
http://www.bookshare.org/web/PressReleaseC.html

+08: MEETING STANDARDS: The public and private sectors have
successfully developed reasonable
accessibility standards, but they have yet to show that they can stick
to them, according to a new report by
the universal access charity HumanITy:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/humanity1

[Section one ends.]


++SPECIAL NOTICE: 'ACCESS IT' AND 'COMPUTE IT'
- MONTHLY TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINES FROM RNIB.

'Access IT' provides computer access technology information of
particular interest to blind and partially
sighted people. It features articles both for the novice and
experienced user. 'Compute IT' is designed for the
computer enthusiast/amateur and will bring you the latest information
on hardware and software
developments.

To subscribe to either of these magazines by email, Braille or disk, at
a cost of 49 pence an issue, email
RNIB Customer Services at cservices@rnib.org.uk
or call 0845 702 3153

[Special notice ends.]


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+09: CORRECT REFERENCE: Trevor Frost, Adaptive Technology Coordinator
at the Royal Society for
the Blind of South Australia, appears to have captured the mood in our
last issue when he noted that the
phrase 'visually impaired' is not as accurate as 'vision impaired' -
the term more commonly used in Australia
- since it is a person's vision that is affected, not their appearance.

Annette Peter agrees: "As a 'blind' person, happy to be described by
that term as people understand what it
means, I was interested to read Mr Frost's item. I must agree with him
that 'visually impaired' is not a
correct term, and is one that I have never been particularly
comfortable with. 'Vision impaired' is a much
more correct term and I would like to see it adopted in this country."

Robin Christopherson, web consultancy manager at the charity
Abilitynet, also concurs: "Trevor's
observation that the term 'visually impaired' means that the person is
unattractive to look at was indeed
greeted by great mirth by myself as predicted. I am a UK resident.

"I'd never thought of it before but now it's obvious that 'vision
impaired' is a better term. I'd better get
started on changing the many dozen references that exist within
AbilityNet's website and our numerous
factsheets on technology for disabled individuals."


+10: RECTANGULAR REPONSE: Last month John Loader wrote in on behalf of
his mother-in-law to
enquire if anyone knew of software which could change a computer cursor
into a big black rectangle.

Terry Balon replied: "Further to the enquiry about large cursors I have
purchased the Valerix MetaMouse
Cursor set and found it absolutely brilliant for the needs of my
family. We are able to change the colour of
the cursor, give it an edge and so on to each of our individual needs
without too much trouble. You can
download a free demo version or purchase from various sites including
http://www.regsoft.com ."

Robin Christopherson adds: "Windows ME and Windows XP have a feature in
the 'Accessibility' option
(Start menu/Settings/Control Panel) to do this. Go to the 'Display'
page of this dialog box and there is a
slider to adjust the width of the flashing cursor.

"Unfortunately, however, the change is not universal. You get the fat
cursor in Notepad and all areas of
Windows where you can type text (such as the 'Find Files and Folders'
dialog box) but not in WordPad or,
more importantly, Microsoft Word.

"For a fat cursor in Word the only option I know of is to use a little
program called "follow.exe" (which
AbilityNet can send out free of charge) that locks the mouse cursor to
the flashing cursor. You can still
move the mouse to free it, but when the cursor moves again it jumps
back and follows along. When the
mouse pointer is over the document window it is still a slim line, but
you can easily redefine it for something
really high-visibility like a big black arrow.

"You can email AbilityNet on enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk or visit
http://www.abilitynet.org.uk ."
[Further responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+11: PURSE-FRIENDLY PRINTER: Long-time bulletin reader Anthony Bernard
from Sri Lanka writes in
to ask all our readers what, in your experience, is the best and
hardiest Braille printer for personal use, and
just as importantly, the one that is easiest on the purse?
[Reponses to inbox@headstar.com].


+12: BOUNCE BACK AGAIN: Jackie Wright (email
wright.jackie@btinternet.com), who wrote in last
month to invite feedback on the accessible CV design and job search
site 'Bounce Back'
(http://www.bounceback.org.uk), would like to point out that her firm
Disability Dynamics is not a
technology company as we stated but rather a disability consultancy.
She says: "We advise organisations on
employment of disabled people and provision of accessible services. We
also advise schools on accessibility
law."

[Section two ends].


++SECTION THREE: INTERVIEW
- JAKOB NIELSEN.

+13: A FAT LOT OF USABILITY?
by Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com .

One of the world's leading champions of web usability, Jakob Nielsen,
was in the UK last month to run a
week-long series of seminars. He took time out to talk to E-Access
Bulletin about the connections between
usability and accessibility, and the poor track record of government
sites in particular in meeting user needs.

Nielsen says the field of usability - how easy it is for a user to find
information on a site or carry out a
transaction - overlaps in many areas with that of accessibility - the
ease with which people with different
needs or using special access devices can gain access to the
information on your site.

"Often accessibility is viewed as totally divorced from usability, but
actually how you present information is
just as important for accessibility as merely being able to get at it.
Even if a web site is accessible according
to the various technical standards, and for example is able to be read
aloud by a screen reader, if there are
endless lists of menu options usability will be heavily impaired."

Both usability and accessibility are assessed in the same way, by
testing against real human needs, he says.
And both cover not only use by people with disabilities, but also
people with different levels of education or
computer skills, he said.

Nielsen (http://www.useit.com/jakob) is principal of the user-centred
design consultancy Nielsen Norman
Group (NN/g - http://www.nngroup.com) which he co-founded with Donald
Norman, former vice president
of research at Apple Computer. Before that he was a senior engineer
with Sun Microsystems, helping the
company establish its first web services.

NN/g has carried out extensive testing of government sites in the US
and Australia, and Nielsen says that his
own informal reviews of public service sites in other countries
including the UK has shown that the lessons
to be learned are universal.

"Government sites are very patchy. You come across a few good ones from
time to time, but they are not
nearly as good as they should be," he says. "They are usually among the
lowest scorers in our usability
tests."

The most common failing for public sector sites is that they are
focused too closely on their own internal
departmental structures and initiatives, or their current work
programmes, and not on what information the
user is actually likely to be seeking, Nielsen says.

"This shows a bureaucratic way of thinking. You see it a little bit on
company sites, but it is predominant on
government sites."

He said government agencies may find it hard to see the need to spend
money on boosting usability, as they
do not make the same 'return on investment' judgments as companies.
"But the fact is that better usability
leads to increased satisfaction for the citizen, which to me is the
reason we have government in the first
place."

In fact, government agencies have even more need to consider usability
than companies, he said. "For
commercial sites, you can make a trade-off and decide to reach a few
customers where you can make the
most money. But for government you can't say that, you can't decide to
only serve a part of the population."

Nielsen's company is one of the pioneers of controlled user testing of
web sites, which he argues is the only
way to properly gauge a site's usability. A group of ordinary users are
observed attempting to perform tasks
on the web, such as find a tax form or a bus route. "It's so common
that people can't find what they are
looking for - it's tragic. And the government agencies that call us in
are the ones who are bothered about
usability. The average agency won't bother looking at it at all."

Nielsen says one example of a US government site that is highly usable
is 'Ready.gov'
(http://www.ready.gov), the Department of Homeland Security's site with
public information about how to
prepare for and respond to various forms of terrorist attack.

"The site explains what to do in clear and simple terms. But it is a
new project, so it was easier to build in
usability."

In the US, the requirement for accessibility standards to be built into
all government technology contracts set
out in section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act
(http://www.section508.gov) had increased awareness of the
issues, he said. But progress is slow, since it mainly affected new
projects. "Section 508 boosted interest in
accessibility, but in practice not many sites have been affected. The
major departments have spent a very
long time implementing it."

As for the precise costs of making a web site more usable and
accessible, Nielsen said that it was possible to
spend a lot of money, and it was right for large organisations with
public-facing sites such as the NHS to do
so, but it was also possible to make at least some progress for a small
outlay.

"There is no such thing as the perfect user interface, a site that is
equally usable by everybody. And it would
be very expensive to come close to such a site. But people should not
think that there is a binary choice
between a horrible web site and a perfect one. No matter what the
budget, you can always take a site and
make improvements. Within three days you can do some testing and draw
up a list of the top ten things you
need to do to improve usability. You should attack the biggest
stumbling blocks first."

[Section three ends.]


++SECTION FOUR: OPINION
- GOVERNMENT POLICY.

+14: OUT OF FOCUS
by Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

At the beginning of the year I drafted a paper which called for policy
on accessibility to be concentrated in
one place within the UK and in Europe.

The paper argued that in the EU, accessibility should be the
responsibility of the Information Society
Directorate, and in the UK it should be co-ordinated by the Office of
the e-Envoy (OeE - http://www.e-
envoy.gov.uk), the cross-government technology policy and
implementation body based in the Cabinet
Office.

I still have a chance with the first objective, but I am having to
rewrite the paper's UK section because the
OeE has just lost about a quarter of its budget and, I would guess,
three-quarters of its importance in co-
ordinating functions.

This leaves us in the awkward position of fighting to save something we
don't love very much, but the fact is
that the OeE is the best mechanism we have. In the UK, there is simply
nowhere else to go. We might try the
Disability Rights Commission which, better late than never, has just
become interested in web accessibility
(see news, this issue); or we might place all our hopes in the new
broadcasting and telecommunications
regulator 'Ofcom' (http://www.ofcom.org.uk). But when it comes to
getting the government to obey its own
accessibility regulations, the best mechanism is a body such as the
e-Envoy's office which is acknowledged
as interdepartmental.

What we don't want is a situation where the four separate government
departments with the biggest interest
in technology policy - the Department for Education and Science, the
Department for Work and Pensions,
the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and the Department of Trade
and Industry - are fighting so
hard for the honour of co-ordinating disability access so that they
don't have time to actually implement
anything.

Meanwhile over the past five years the accessibility lobby has not been
doing at all well on broadcasting.
The EU (as reported in the last issue of E-Access Bulletin) is in the
last lap of legislation on digital TV and
broad band access and the draft bill doesn't even mention disability
access. Nor does the UK's
Communications Bill which is almost through Parliament.

To some extent, from the mighty pinnacle of the UK's e-Envoy himself
Andrew Pinder down to the
humblest charity policy officer, we have all made the same mistake. We
have been travelling into the future
with our backs to the engine, concentrating in the information age on
the computer and not on the
information industry which is driven by broadcasting and will be
supplied through the telephone. Thus,
while we have been worrying purely about web site accessibility,
broadcasting, telecommunications and
their user interfaces have been steadily deregulated as the result of
globalisation.

The reality at the political level is that there isn't much the OeE can
do in a dog fight with the DTI and, it is
becoming increasingly clear, there isn't much the OeE can do across
government because there are two many
departmental interests getting in the way. This is not surprising. When
we call for joined up government, we
forget for example that the NHS, as the biggest corporate entity in the
UK, has enough problems getting
itself a common technology policy, let alone one which also fits the
DfES, itself the size of the HSBC
banking group.

So it looks like the OeE will soon sail into the technological sunset:
an entity that came too late, did too little
and left too soon. Meanwhile, we need to cast about for another
centralising entity. It may have to be the
Disability Rights Commission, but the problem is that even this body
will soon be rolled up with the Equal
Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality into a
generic equality commission.

It may be that the major disability non-governmental organisations
(NGOs) will have to get together and
start their own small but supercharged agency. The problem with that
course is that it will have to have
autonomy and NGOs that spend most of their time squabbling are not very
good at empowering what they
perceive may turn into a rival. But we haven't much time for paperwork
on this issue: it just needs to be
done.

NOTE: Kevin Carey is Director of HumanITy (http://www.humanity.org.uk),
a charity focusing on
technology and social inclusion.

[Section four ends.]


++SECTION FIVE: VIEWPOINT
- CAREER PATHS.

+15: STEPPING AHEAD
by Nolan Crabb  ncra@teleport.com .

There is an ancient Chinese proverb which says: "A journey of a
thousand miles must begin with a single
step."

For me, the journey to a writing career began in high school with a
single raised hand. During journalism
class, I volunteered to write the weekly school activities column for
the Ogden Standard-Examiner, the daily
paper in Ogden, Utah where I grew up. That column ultimately led to a
summer internship with the paper
during college and then to my first job as a reporter.

Since then, I've held a variety of writing jobs in various cities
around the country. For a brief time, I
abandoned writing altogether to teach technology. So how does one
manage a career that includes so many
twists and turns?

The first important point to make is that, as a blind or vision
impaired person taking your own thousand-mile
journey, don't be afraid to take risks and follow your hunches. I've
had seven jobs and lived in every time
zone in the US since 1982. Many would say that such a lifestyle is
unstable or problematic, but I saw those
job changes as new opportunities that would allow me to better my life,
and that of my family.

Every move had its attendant risks. In 1986, I moved from Chicago to
the Bay Area of northern California.
I'd learned of a job with a small company that produced newsletters for
various businesses. I used what
meagre savings I had to pay for my plane ticket to California for the
interview. Foolish? Perhaps. But at the
end of the day, I had a job offer, and suddenly my apparent foolishness
paid off.

I don't recommend that everyone live their lives as nomadically as I
have. But after you've researched the
job you want, you may have to risk moving to a bigger city to secure
that job. Comfort zones are wonderful
places, but they can be stifling, too. The alternative to taking a risk
could be growing old and bitter,
obsessing about jobs that might have been.

Its important to plan for the possibilities in attending an interview.
It's not enough to just badly want to
work. At the last minute, as I was leaving my home for that job
interview in California, I grabbed my
Optacon - a device that allows blind people to read printed material -
flung it into my bag, and headed for
the airport.

During the interview, the company's chief executive said he expected me
to take a writing test. He gave me
two pages of notes on a real estate deal. "Take these and turn them
into a hot news story," he said. "I've
another interview to do; I don't have time to sit and read you these
notes. I guess I can find a staff person to
do this, but . . ." I interrupted and assured him that as long as those
notes weren't hand-written, I could
handle them fine. I was glad I had my Optacon with me.

I'm not suggesting you can plan for every possibility. But you can take
an active part in your interview by
thinking about answers in advance to questions you're sure you'll be
asked. Better yet, think about how to
openly present, from your perspective, some of the concerns that the
interviewer may hesitate bringing up.

Immerse yourself in your chosen career. I don't mean spend all hours at
the office, abandoning family and
all other vestiges of life. I mean immerse yourself in the industry's
publications; learn its buzzwords; learn
something about the players in that industry; by immersing yourself in
the literature of your field, you're
better prepared to change the way you do things so you won't become a
burdensome dinosaur.

Reading trade magazines in your field is a great way to learn about job
openings. If you're just browsing the
newspaper or even internet job boards, you're probably missing some
great opportunities that are announced
in trade publications. The advent of the internet makes such magazines
even easier to read.

Technology is good, but attitude and technology are better. There's no
question that getting and retaining a
job depends a lot on the technology you can use and how easy it is to
get at that technology.

My first experience with computers at a newspaper came in 1977 while in
college. Those computers didn't
talk, and there was no Braille display. I had to memorise long
keystroke sequences to file a story with the
editorial desk. But as my jobs changed, so did my ability to use
technology.

For years, I feared making the jump from DOS to Windows. At the time I
was contemplating making that
jump I was working for the American Council of the Blind, where LeRoy
Saunders was president. I
expressed my concerns to him and, in that straightforward way that was
his trademark, he said with a smile:
"It's not the technology that's the problem, it's your attitude."  His
point was well taken. By January 1997, I
was using Windows with a screen reader.

So if you're looking for the right career or to change jobs, you can
start by taking small steps. For me, it all
began with something as simple as a raised hand - that single step on
the way to a fruitful and enjoyable
career.

NOTE: Nolan Crabb is assistant editor of Dialogue
(http://www.blindskills.com), a US-based journal for
vision impaired people for all ages. This article is reprinted with
permission from Dialogue, winter 2002.
Dialogue is available in braille, large print, four-track cassette, and
computer diskette. For a free sample,
email blindskl@teleport.com or if you are in the US call (800) 860-4224
.

[Section five ends.]


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337

[Issue ends.]

