+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 44, AUGUST 2003.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).

Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard. For details see:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++CORRECTION: JULY ISSUE.

In our July issue we ran a story, 'Secret action could trigger wave of
cases,' about legal action over inaccessible web sites. In this piece an
editing error led us to state that the Disability Rights Commission was
involved in this action. In fact, the action is being taken by individuals
supported by the RNIB alone, and we would like to apologise to the
commission for this error.

[Correction ends].


++ISSUE 44 CONTENTS.

01: Assistive technology users 'poorly served'
- interim findings of major investigation

02: Accessible procurement plans on hold
- software guidelines await support.

03: Colleges slow to take up free software offer
- only a third use new LIFT licence.

04: Mobile showdown set for autumn.
- new offerings for talking phones.

News in brief: 05: New arenas - online forums; 06: Maths myths -
email group; 07: 20/20 vision - October teachers' conference.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Radio signals - internet stations; 09: Spanish lessons - audio and
Braille resources; 10: Suite success - Shropshire project.

Section three: Research - web access.
11: Speak no evil: As testing by a 50-strong group of disabled users
continues, Mel Poluck finds out what the UK's largest study into web
accessibility has discovered so far.

Section four: Opinion - e-equality.
12: Building a dream. Will the Disability Discrimination Act help to
create an 'internet playground' where all visitors are equal, or will
the
accessible e-revolution remain a paradisiacal fantasy? Andres Crespo
has a dream.

[Contents ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY USERS 'POORLY SERVED'.

Many assistive technology products for people with vision impairment,
such as screen-readers, are unreliable and do not serve their users
well, the leader of the UK's largest ever web site accessibility
investigation said last week.

Helen Petrie, professor of human computer interaction at City
University London, is heading the major web research project on
behalf of the Disability Rights Commission, managing a team of testers
using a range of assistive products. "I was very struck by how poorly
served people are by their assistive technology," she said at a
progress briefing.

Assistive technology products are also often too complicated for users'
needs, and cause computers to crash too often, Petrie said. "They are
not as stable as one would hope."

Vision impaired testers have found filling in online forms using a
screen reader particularly tough, she said. "Too much concentration is
going on their assistive technology and not on the task they are trying
to do."

At focus group meetings held as part of the research programmes, a
long discussion was held about the problems brought about by assistive
technologies, Petrie said. She said she was "shocked" by the responses
when users were asked how the technologies were working.

"I think we'll make recommendations for people that work with
assistive technology to make a range of systems ranging from simple to
complex for people to access the web," Petrie said.

Project manager Steven Beesley, from the DRC, said he would be
happy to put pressure on assistive technology providers to improve
their products. Full findings of the research will be published at the
end of the year.

NOTE: For a full report on the progress briefing see section three,
this issue: 'Speak no evil'.


+02: ACCESSIBLE PROCUREMENT PLANS ON HOLD.

An attempt to develop disability-friendly software development rules
for all large organisations could be stymied unless the RNIB finds a
partner willing to take it beyond the concept phase, E-Access Bulletin
has learned.

Most large organisations commission the development of significant
amounts of new or tailored software to assist aspects of their work or
internal efficiency. The charity wants to ensure as much as possible of
such activity is accessible by developing a standard policy which any
organisation could adapt.

It will start by looking at its own software procurement practice, but
is keen to sign up a partner to help develop the policy and ensure it is
widely applicable.

"We need a large government department or a large employer," says
the project's manager Ruth Loebl. "If partnerships are not formed,
there will be a risk that many organisations create their own
guidelines
independently, which will mean that software developers will have to
apply different criteria for different customers. This can only devalue
the issues, and increase the cost of software. The seeming inability of
customers to agree on what comprises accessibility would surely
undermine the principles we are trying to promote."

However Loebl said that so far, only verbal support has been gained
from three potential partners: the Department for Work and Pensions,
the Office of the e-Envoy, and the Employers Forum
(http://www.employers-forum.co.uk). Other organisations that might
make good potential partners include the BBC and high street financial
institutions, she said.

The RNIB's thinking about software procurement is set out in an
unpublished paper seen by E-Access Bulletin which suggests that
accessibility rules should come in two parts: a concise set of legal
standards and a lengthier code of practice. Failure to incorporate
accessibility into procurement is likely to breach the Disability
Discrimination Act, it warns.

The RNIB drew on three existing resources in drawing up its
proposals, a checklist for accessible software drawn up by IBM
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/ibm1); section 508 of the US
Rehabilitation Act (http://www.section508.gov); and the Irish National
Disability Authority guidelines
(http://www.accessit.nda.ie/guidelineindex_4.html). To ensure the
policy is sensitive to the broadest range of disabilities the paper has
been sent to the charities Mencap, Scope, the RNID, the British
Dyslexic Association, and AbilityNet for comment.


+03: COLLEGES SLOW TO TAKE UP FREE SOFTWARE OFFER.

Only a third of UK colleges and universities have taken up an offer of
free software to test the accessibility of their websites, according to
EduServ (http://www.eduserv.ac.uk), the national education
technology charity which has launched the new scheme.

Under a bulk licensing agreement negotiated by EduServ, all 750 UK
colleges and universities have been granted free use of the 'LIFT'
series of accessibility products developed by US firm UsableNet (see
http://www.usablenet.com/products_services). The products help
designers and publishers make the content and navigation features of
their web sites more accessible to people with visual impairments.

Under the scheme institutions may use versions of LIFT which work
with the web site development software packages Dreamweaver and
FrontPage, or LIFT Online
(http://www.usablenet.com/frontend/demoform.jsp). Each institution
will pay a preferential rate for use of more than one product, and
could save up to 8,000 pounds each on licence fees, which would add up to
millions of pounds in all.

"So far, around 200 licences have been taken up, and we're anxious for
more people to take up this opportunity," said Stephen Butcher of
EduServ. "We ran several workshops before the summer break and it
appears there is great variation in awareness of this issue."

There is increased pressure on colleges and universities to improve the
accessibility of their web sites because the Special Educational Needs
and Disability Act (SENDA - http://fastlink.headstar.com/senda1)
comes into force this autumn, setting new standards for study aids.

A good response to the LIFT initiative could mean that other tester
products are included in the EduServ scheme. According to recent
research it is advisable to test web sites using a combination of
products, rather than relying on a single solution such as LIFT (see E-
Access Bulletin, issue 42, June 2003).


+04: MOBILE SPEECH SHOWDOWN SET FOR AUTUMN.

This autumn the two main contenders in the field of mobile phone
speech software - Mobile Accessibility and TALKS - will step up their
competition with new products for a wider range of phones and
portable digital assistants (PDAs).

The Spanish-developed software Mobile Accessibility
(http://www.mobileaccessibility.com) currently runs on Nokia phones
using the Symbian series 60 operating system. The application -
developed by the firm Code Factory in partnership with the Spanish
national blindness charity ONCE - allows various features of the phone
to be spoken aloud including text messages, a contact book, alarms and
a battery and signal strength monitor.

This autumn Mobile Accessibility is set to expand to four other
platforms including the SPV smartphone which uses Microsoft
Windows.

Meanwhile the German system TALKS (formerly TALX - see
http://www.talx.de/index_e.htm) - came to the UK in January when
Vodafone UK and the RNIB launched a 'speaking phone' based on the
Nokia 9210i Communicator - a mobile phone/PDA hybrid (see E-
Access Bulletin, issue 36, December 2002). TALKS is a screen-reader
which allows speech output of everything shown on the display of a
mobile device.

TALKS is set to take on Mobile Accessibility directly in September
when it releases a screen-reader for phones which use the Symbian
series 60 operating system. According to a TALKS spokesperson the
new system will cost around 150 pounds, just 20 pounds more than the
Mobile Accessibility application.

TALKS says its screen reader product offers more flexibility than the
Mobile Accessibility solutions, giving access to all the hundreds of
applications developed for the new phones. Mobile Accessibility,
meanwhile, said it was ready to consolidate its lead in the series 60
market, launching an updated version before the end of the year along
with Danish, Dutch and Norwegian speaking versions.


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+05: NEW ARENAS: Two online discussion forums for people
interested in accessibility issues have been launched over the past few
weeks. The first is within the 'WebProWorld' site, run by the
technology IT newsletter publisher iEntry:
http://www.webproworld.com/viewforum.php?f=12
and the other from Accessify, the online accessibility information
resource:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

+06: MATHS MYTHS: An email group has been set up by a blind
maths teacher in the US to dispel some of the myths about maths and
blindness. The 'BlindMath' list will help members share information
about accessible texts, tactile and sonic graphing programs, and
techniques for blind teachers:
http://www.smartgroups.com/groups/blindmath .

+07: 20/20 VISION: The UK's main conference organised by and for
teachers of children and young people with vision impairment, XX/20
VIEW, is to be held on 9 and 10 October at Birmingham University.
The event is organised by the teachers' chapter of the blindness
association VIEW. For details email:
ecs.kay.wrench@oldham.gov.uk .

[Section one ends].


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+08: RADIO SIGNALS: Last issue Peter Petersen wrote in with a
request for
information on finding internet radio stations on behalf of his mother
in New Zealand, whose sight is poor.

Allan Thomas, a technician at Clarity Transcription Services in Hull,
responds: "I'm not sure about software or hardware devices that will
scan the internet for radio stations. However, you might want to take a
closer look at web sites dedicated to internet radio stations such as
Mike's Radio World (http://www.mikesradioworld.com). Here you can
browse through several thousand radio stations, and you can even
download the radio players you may need."

And another bulletin reader, Prabal Basak, puts in a related request:
"I want to know about digital radio: how it works, and how it can be
received." Do any readers know of good basic information web sites
about digital radio? [Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: SPANISH LESSONS: We have received a few offers of
information and help for our reader Jane Sellers, who contacted us last
month to see if anyone knew of any good tapes or other resources to
help her learn Spanish.

Judy Haswell of the Royal New Zealand Foundation for the Blind
Library in Auckland suggested she take a look at Linguaphone's 'All
Talk' audio-only Spanish course available on CD or audio cassette. It
costs about 50 pounds for beginner or intermediate level, or about 90
pounds for beginner and intermediate level combined. Linguaphone
can be contacted on 0800 282 417 or at:
http://www.linguaphone.com .

And John Coggans from Ontario says: "The Hadley School for the
Blind at 700 Elm St, Winnetka, Illinois 60093, US (http://www.hadley-
school.org) offers a course in conversational Spanish in Braille and
tape. The tape version, besides providing the course material available
in Braille, also gives guidance to pronunciation. It is offered as a
conversational course rather than a detailed grammar course, so for
example there are no long lists of verb conjugations."


+10: SUITE SUCCESS: Susan White of Shropshire County Council
writes in to say: "I was interested in the news about the specially-
adapted computer suites in Leicester to allow people with vision
impairments to learn new IT skills (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 43,
July 2003, story 07).

"Here in Shropshire the Disability Consortium
(http://www.shropshiredisability.org) has been offering training to
vision-impaired people for the past two years. This has now been
extended out and offered to disabled people in general. The training is
supported by the Learning and Skills Council.

"The accessible software in Shropshire libraries on the machines
funded by the People's Network project
(http://www.peoplesnetwork.gov.uk) is the same, to provide the link
with the training offered for those people unable to afford or not
interested in acquiring their own software. The training will also be
offered using some library sites on their closed days to reduce the
amount of travelling for disabled people as a partnership agreement
between Shropshire libraries and the Disability Consortium."

[Section two ends].


++SECTION THREE: RESEARCH
- WEB ACCESS.

+11: SPEAK NO EVIL
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com .

"If you're hoping to hear lots of exciting results, I'm afraid you're
going to be disappointed - we want to identify bad practice, not bad
practitioners."

Such was the news from Helen Petrie, professor of Human Computer
Interaction at City University's School of Informatics, (http://www-
hcid.soi.city.ac.uk), at a briefing last week on her team's ongoing
investigation into web site accessibility on behalf of the Disability
Rights Commission (DRC- http://www.drc-gb.org).

The investigation, described by Petrie as having now reached 'halfway
house', is entitled "an in-depth study of the current state of web site
accessibility in Britain". It will survey the web sites of 1,000
randomly selected organisations in both the public and private sectors, testing
for compliance with accessibility standards. In addition, a panel of 50
disabled people will take part in more in-depth testing of a sample of
these sites (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 40, April 2003).

As Petrie was keen to stress, the project's final report will not name
poor sites. Instead it hopes to increase awareness of web accessibility
by detailing cases of good practice and creating resources to help
organisations to measure the accessibility of their site. However, the
intention is not to create a new set of standards or a new standards
body, Petrie said.

Project manager Steven Beesley from the DRC said: "We want to work
with people. We'd like to help, advise and conciliate rather than wade
in with big boots."

As an initial part of the work, a group of unnamed firms were given a
questionnaire with a scale rating for various questions about
accessibility. The question "How interested is your company in web
accessibility?" gave rise to particularly disappointing results, with a
low response rate, and those that did respond demonstrating a lack of
awareness. Consequently, the investigation team will be making
recommendations in the area of training, Petrie said. Pressure will be
applied on organisations such as the British Computer Society to make
accessibility training more widely available, she said.

Respondents were also asked how easy or useful are the guidelines
developed by the international Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI -
http://www.w3.org/WAI/Resources), regarded as the industry standard.
Interestingly, they found that newer guidelines developed by the RNIB
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/rnib1) are more commonly used than WAI
guidelines. One attendee said: "We struggle to understand in terms of
plain English some of the WAI and government stuff - we've found it
gobbledygook." Petrie said it was likely the team would make
recommendations to WAI based on their findings.

Another attendee said WAI guidelines were hard to follow, and she
would like to be able to turn to a recommended audit procedure. To
this Petrie said "That's an absolutely brilliant idea - watch this
space."

The project's panel of testers, ten of whom are blind and nine
partially sighted, have now completed a basic accessibility check - using a
newly-devised automated method - on the home pages of the 1,000
sample web sites across five categories including governmental and
entertainment. Of these, 100 sites that did well in this test were
selected for more detailed analysis, and this is now half-completed.
Testers with a range of disabilities, IT knowledge and assistive
technologies are being filmed as they participate in task-based
sessions such as filling out an online form - particularly troublesome for
vision-impaired users according to the team - and performing simple searches.

One clear early finding is that images on web pages are rarely 'tagged',
meaning that no text alternative is provided, and texts that are provided
are not good enough, Petrie said. "This needs to be part of the editorial
work and not just left to the people implementing the code."

Another finding was that technology that aims to help people with
disabilities may not be performing well. "It's very easy to place all
the blame about accessibility on the web but I was very struck by how
poorly served people are by their assistive technology" Petrie said.
She cited screen reader inefficiency and frequent crashing as particular
problems, and said the team will be making recommendations to
manufacturers of assistive technology.

All the project findings will be made available in a DRC report at the
end of 2003. Most organisations examined will not be named, although
sites in the top 100 will be allowed information on user testing
results and awards will be offered to the top ten.

The creation of a good practice web site may also result from the
study. Petrie and Beesley plan to make recommendations for resources
for web site developers, with prototype examples.

"The challenge is to the web development community," Petrie
concluded. "If you test your web site on people who use assistive
technology, then it'll be easy for everyone to use: this is the real
business case that we can develop."

[Section three ends].


++ SECTION FOUR: OPINION
- E-EQUALITY.

+12: BUILDING A DREAM
by Andres Crespo  andres.crespo@londonconnects.org.uk .

Back in the 1960s Dr Martin Luther King had a dream in which black
children and white children were playing together. I may not be quite
as high-achieving as Dr King, but I reserve my right to build my own
dreams.

Last night I had a dream.

I dreamed of an internet playground where all visitors could experience
the full benefits irrespective of their differences. An internet
playground where everybody was different but with equal rights to get
as much as anyone else . an internet space where information (and
according to Francis Bacon information is power) was not in the hands
of the establishment, as in previous centuries, but in the hands of all
of us.

I woke up this morning and thought about my dream. These days
legislation is abundant and the technology is mature. In broad terms,
the Freedom Of Information Act makes it an obligation to make
information available. The Disability Discrimination Act requires the
provision of services in equal terms. Conferences constantly remind
the public sector why and how it should build this paradisiacal internet
playground where all people, not just the majority, can reap the
benefits.

With all this, I naively felt the battle of 'accessibility' had been
won, and I went to my local pub to celebrate this social victory on e-
equality. My mate Robin was there, chatting with Ken and Dane.
Robin is totally blind but can still 'see' more than the average person
with his sharp hearing, his sense of smell, his touch and his uncommon
common sense. Ken had been a bright engineer until multiple sclerosis
hit him and left him severely disabled. Dane is a successful technology
professional who is dyslexic.

I told them about my triumphal dream and that in my view the dream
had become a reality. Looking at their astonished straight faces, I
couldn't quite make out if they were "pissed" or "pissed off" (excuse
the language) until I heard what they (the people with disabilities)
had to say.

Ken told me that due to his physical condition he cannot use a mouse,
but this is no problem if developers make sure that navigation is
possible just by pressing the 'Tab' key. For example, only yesterday he
visited the central government site that dictates technical standards
for information exchange, 'Govtalk' (http://www.govtalk.gov.uk). He
couldn't navigate through the information available in their
inaccessible scrolling headlines right in the beginning of the home
page.

This could have been usually sorted by producing a link to a page with
breaking news as opposed to scrolling text that is to be avoided
according to any guidelines available.

Robin explained that on Ken's example, his speech synthesiser
wouldn't even pick up the fact that breaking news was being offered
and was also surprised to see that an HTML frameset, so discouraged
by every guideline available, had been used. This could have been
easily avoided if HTML had been used to display the breaking news as
opposed to a heavily JavaScript solution.

Dane confessed that he had given up on using "Search" in any
government site as searches are based on a keyword typed by the user.
With his dyslexia, words are frequently misspelled (and one cannot
spell-check when trying to search, can one?), leading to the response:
'No matches found'.

This could have been easily avoided if a 'knowledge management'
package had been used as opposed to a keyword-based search engine.
Knowledge management allows for misspelling and synonymous terms
when searching.

After my enlightening encounter, I decided to wake up and smell the
coffee. Those that we are looking up to as role models are saying "Do
as I say, not as I do". Until we see a move from legislation to
implementation, the accessibility war is still on.

And you! Yes, you!  Whose side are you on? Are you with the ones
that act positively and don't talk about it, or those that preach
impressively but then act against their own advice? The ball is in your
court.

NOTE: Andres Crespo is partnership manager at London Connects
(http://www.londonconnects.org.uk), the agency responsible for
delivering electronic government in London.

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
News editor -
Reporter - Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Correspondent - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
