+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 48, DECEMBER 2003.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).
A Merry Christmas to all our readers!

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription
details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 48 CONTENTS.

01: Revolutionary speech technology to launch
- talking newspapers mimic human voice.

02: Microsoft legal actions set to continue
- software giant plea to 'call off the lawyers'.

03: Visionary design winners announced
- National Library for the Blind web awards.

04: TV channel Five adds audio description
- satellite-borne service to reach millions.

News in brief: 05: Phone anything - voice browsing; 06: EYPD blue -
European politician speaks out; 07: Thin access - Dolphin
announcement.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Flat out - screen problems; 09: Music quiz - sheet music query;
10: Bugbear slain - talking text messages; 11: Clear speech -
explaining market predictions.

Section three: Special report - web awards.
12: Designs for life: This week saw the announcement of the National
Library for the Blind's Visionary Design Awards for web
accessibility.
Mel Poluck talks to the winners about the secrets of their success.

Section four: Opinion - Techshare 2003.
13: A new era of realism? At this year's conference on the use of
technology by people with sight problems, Kevin Carey detected a
welcome change of tone among both lobbyists and industry
representatives.

[Contents ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: REVOLUTIONARY SPEECH TECHNOLOGY TO LAUNCH.

New synthetic speech technology is set to revolutionise the way blind
and partially sighted people access newspaper and magazine content,
according to the RNIB.

The institute has joined forces with specialist firm Rhetorical
(http://www.rhetorical.com) to create CD versions of magazines. The
Rhetorical technology, called rVoice, uses "voice modelling" to
record
real voices; analyse pronunciation and intonation; and produce a
model
of each voice which predicts how individual words would be
pronounced. The result can translate text into synthetic speech which
is
"virtually indistinguishable" from a human voice, says Steve Tyler,
policy and ICT access manager at the RNIB.

Until now, text-to-speech technologies have often produced
artificial-
sounding voices that are confusing and off-putting. As a result,
users
have preferred recordings of newspapers and magazines read on to tape
by actors and volunteers, a time-consuming and expensive process.
Using rVoice however, a TV listing which currently takes an RNIB
volunteer around 17 hours to record can be reproduced in less than an
hour.

The system has considerable potential for specialist applications,
Tyler
says. "Take accountancy course materials which are very technical.
They would cost around 60,000 pounds to produce in audio, mainly
because of the specialist knowledge required to 'translate' the
content.
With Rhetorical, voices can be 'trained' for specific subjects by
recording accountancy terminology, substantially reducing production
costs."

Later this month, the RNIB is launching pilot CD versions of the TV
listings magazines 'Radio Times' and 'TV Times' using rVoice. The
magazines will be tested by users of DAISY digital talking book
players, and there are plans to test other delivery mechanisms such
as
telephones and the internet.


+02: MICROSOFT LEGAL ACTIONS SET TO CONTINUE.

Legal wrangling between US lobby groups and Microsoft over the
accessibility of its software seem set to continue, despite a plea
from
the company last month that it has realised the error of its ways,
and it
was time to "call off the lawyers" so everyone could proceed in
partnership.

The call came from Madelyn Bryant McIntire, the Director of
Microsoft's Accessibility Group, as she delivered the keynote address
to last month's Techshare conference on access to technology, hosted
by the RNIB (http://www.techshare.org.uk).

McIntire admitted that Microsoft's user testing had until now
"overlooked" people with sight problems, but that would now change.
She said the company now recognised that such people form a
significant market segment: for example, a survey by research
company Forrester of 15,000 households in the US found that around
28 per cent of all citizens say they have either correctible or non
correctible vision problems with reading newsprint (though the survey
did not ask about accessing computer screens).

However, McIntire said that legal action had made the discussion too
rigid and that it was time to "call off the lawyers". This was
understood
by most present to refer to consumer organisations in the US which
have fought hard in the courts over measures such as section 508,
which requires all technology companies supplying the US federal
government to ensure their products are accessible to all.

The answer is partnership, not confrontation, McIntire said. She said
terms like "disability" and "impairment" were barriers to effective
dialogue, and a better term was "social inclusion".

However Janina Sajka, director of director of technology research and
development at the American Foundation for the Blind, said later: "I
am glad Microsoft has discovered the disability continuum, but I hate
to think where blind people would be if we had not used legal means
to
extract some accessibility out of major companies. We're not about to
call off the lawyers."

NOTE: For more Techshare reporting see section four, this issue - 'A
new era of realism?'


+03: VISIONARY DESIGN WINNERS ANNOUNCED

The winners of the Visionary Design Awards for high quality
accessible web sites (http://visdesign.nlbuk.org) were announced this
week by the National Library for the Blind in the UK (NLB -
http://www.nlb-online.org).

The winners were 'The friendly duck'
(http://www.calibre.org.uk/Kids),  new web site for kids from the
Calibre cassette library, in the youth and education category;
'Adviceguide' (http://www.adviceguide.org.uk), from Citizens Advice,
for news and information; Rushcliffe Borough Council
(http://www.rushcliffe.gov.uk), for government; Manchester United
football club (http://www.manutd.com/access), for large
organisations;
comedy show the Bradshaws (http://www.thebradshaws.biz), for small
to medium organisations; and Birmingham Focus on Blindness
(http://www.birminghamfocus.org.uk) for voluntary organisations.

Winners were nominated by vision-impaired people, web designers
and site owners. A spokeswoman for the NLB said the organisation
aims to use the awards as part of an ongoing campaign to encourage
website developers to consider access technology.

NOTE: For a full report on the Visionary Design Awards, including
interviews with the winners, see 'Designs for life,' section three,
this
issue.


+04: TV CHANNEL FIVE ADDS AUDIO DESCRIPTION.

The TV station Five (http://www.five.tv - formerly Channel Five) has
become the first UK public service broadcaster to offer an audio
description service using digital satellite broadcasting, increasing
the
number of people able to receive description from 4.5 to 7.1 million
in
one fell swoop.

Audio description adds a verbal description of what is taking place
on
screen between pieces of dialogue. Previously Five had offered this
service on Freeview (http://www.freeview.co.uk), the digital
terrestrial
service delivered through a set-top box.

However, manufacturers have been slow to develop Freeview boxes
that can receive audio description, which is currently only
accessible to
45 trial viewers. By adding audio description to its service
delivered
over BSkyB satellite (http://www.sky.com), Five is now reaching
millions of homes with the service. BSkyB itself - though not a free-
to-air channel with a regulated public service element like the main
five UK terrestrial channels - already delivers some 3,000 hours a
year
of audio described programming on its pay channels such as Sky One
and Sky News.

Some Freeview equipment is now being developed to receive audio
description. RNIB digital broadcasting development officer Clive
Miller says two products are in the pipeline: Nebula DigiTV
(http://www.nebula.electronics.com), a digital TV receiver for use
with
PCs, and i-Player, a Freeview receiver from Netgem
(http://www.netgem.com).

Delivery technology is not the only barrier to the development of
audio
description, however - the descriptions need to be written and
recorded
in the first place. The target for audio - described content was
recently
raised from six to ten per cent by the time a broadcaster is in its
tenth
year of service under the Communications Act 2003, with a draft code
on compliance to be put out for consultation by the new industry
regulator Ofcom (http://www.ofcom.org.uk) later this month.

However, the RNIB has criticised the ten per cent quota and is
campaigning for it to be raised to 50 per cent. The organisation is
also
lobbying the BBC, ITV and Channel Four to follow the example of
Five and to use the existing BSkyB system to deliver their audio-
described content.

NOTE: Readers wishing to support the RNIB's campaign for more
audio description can email campaign@rnib.org.uk for draft letters to
send to broadcasters and politicians.


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+05: PHONE ANYTHING: A new phone-based internet service,
PhoneAnything, will allow vision-impaired people in the UK to
browse the web, fill in online forms and access internet radio using
any
telephone. Calls to the service, activated by voice or keyboard
commands, are made by dialling 0845 333 0845, charged at local rates:
http://www.phoneanything.com/vpweb.htm .

+06: EYPD BLUE: Liz Lynne, the European Parliament member
appointed as official 'rapporteur' for the European Year of People
with
Disabilities 2003, has said that the year did not meet its potential
and
was "depressingly weak on positive outcomes." She says the year has
raised awareness of disability issues, but now must be backed up by
speedier implementation of the EU Disability Directive and the
employment directive to ban discrimination on the grounds of
disability in the workplace:
http://www.lizlynne.org.uk/story.php?id=182 .

+07: THIN ACCESS: The computer access software specialist Dolphin
has announced that the latest versions of its Supernova, Hal, Lunar
and
LunarPlus products will work on 'thin client' computers - low-
functionality terminals which generally cannot run special access
software:
http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk/news/t_services.htm .

[Section one ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: WEB ACCESSIBILITY FORUM.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating
to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new
accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along
and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.

- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.

- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+08: FLAT OUT: Robby Barnes of the Kaizen Program for New
English Learners with Visual Limitations in Seattle, Washington
writes
to add to our recent correspondence on the use of screen magnifiers
with flat-screen monitors (see also Inbox, last issue).

"The problems I have experienced with a flat-screen monitor with
ZoomText screen magnification at 5x or 6x involved 'ghosting'
(breaking up of the screen image) when I moved the mouse or scrolled
the page up or down. This made it very tiring to read with
magnification for any length of time. Regular monitors don't have
this
problem because they have a much faster refresh rate.

"Is it possible that the TFT iiyama AS 4611 UT 18-inch screen has a
faster than usual refresh rate which makes it compatible with screen
magnification?" NOTE: in our last issue, Chris McMillan said that she
had encountered no problems using ZoomText with this iiyama screen.
[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: MUSIC QUIZ: Scott Rae of the Highland Society for Blind
People has a quick question about accessible music tools. "I work
with
visually impaired teens, and we are exploring their barriers to
social
inclusion and they are starting to challenge them. Have any readers
come across technology that would help visually impaired youth read
sheet music?" Suggestions please to inbox@headstar.com .


+10: BUGBEAR SLAIN: The blind barrister Fayyaz Afzal, profiled in
our November issue, said his biggest technology bugbear was not
being able to read text messages on his mobile phone. Lynn
Holdsworth, Web Developer at the RNIB, writes in to say: "Perhaps
this would be of interest to Fayyaz. I'm currently using a Nokia 3650
with an excellent beta version of the Talx [speech output] software
that
runs on Symbian phones.

"The software should be commercially released in the next month or
so. With it I'm able to check my battery and signal strength, read
text
messages, use contact lists and the appointment scheduler. I don't
yet
have access to WAP, but that's about the only thing that's lacking."


+11: CLEAR SPEECH: In our last issue, we ran a news piece saying
that the US analyst Donna Fluss of DMG Consulting was predicting
that the worldwide market for speech technology products is set to
leap
forward over the next 18 to 24 months.

After reading the piece, Jo Fullerton, Lead Technology Officer (pre-
16) at the RNIB Education Centre Scotland, wrote in with a point of
clarification: "Do you think all your readers will realise that Donna
Fluss is talking about speech control of computers (voice recognition
and voice input) rather than screen readers? It took me a while
reading
her original article to be clear that she is talking about speech
mainly as
an input device rather than as output.

"Nevertheless, there are links between the technologies, so hopefully
this business thrust will benefit blind users of computers too. I
suppose
if speech input did become as accurate as keyboarding and some of the
other difficulties were reduced, those blind people who have not
learned touch typing should benefit."

[Section two ends].


++ SECTION THREE: SPECIAL REPORT
- WEB AWARDS.

+12: DESIGNS FOR LIFE
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com .

"It's a funny thing building an accessible web site: people don't
always
realise the work that goes into it", says Emma Charles, one of six
web
site producers honoured at this month's 'Visionary Design' awards
(http://www.visionary-design.org).

The awards, hosted by the National Library for the Blind (NLB -
http://www.nlb-online.org), were judged by a panel including ten
people with vision impairment. Emma Charles' company TWI
Interactive (http://www.twii.net) produced the web site for the
Manchester United football team (http://www.manutd.com) which
scooped the 'large organisation' prize.

Manchester United plc has a formal policy to meet the needs of its
disabled supporters (http://fastlink.headstar.com/mufc1), working
with
the Manchester United Disabled Supporters Association (MUDSA -
http://www.mudsa.com). The policy includes a commitment to web
accessibility, and members of MUDSA, one of whom is vision-
impaired, helped to test the team's web site before it went live.

Although the team's main web site is not fully accessible, there is a
separate accessible site carrying most of the information to be found
on
the main site. "You can change the text size up to a high level while
maintaining the page layout (see http://www.manutd.com/access), so
people with vision difficulties don't necessarily have to use screen
magnification, which can create a bit of disorientation," Charles
says.

Also popular with the judges was the way users of the site can choose
colour combinations: "You can choose to 'skin' your web site in one
of
the colours of the Manchester United kits," says Charles. Luckily,
the
team's kit colours coincide well with those colour combinations that
many people with impaired vision find easier to use.

The winner of the award in the government category was Rushcliffe
Borough Council (http://www.rushcliffe.gov.uk) in Nottinghamshire.
The council's one-man-band web developer Laura van Weyenbergh
claims accessible features of the site "are nothing revolutionary."
She
says: "I started it because I felt passionate about it, but anyone at
the
award ceremony would have felt inspired - it made me more fired up".

Referring to the international Web Accessibility Initiative
guidelines
(http://www.w3.org/WAI/), whose highest standard is known as
'AAA', she says "I was quite surprised we won because we were not
AAA compliant". The site does however include a facility to make the
text display larger; 'access keys' to assist browsing using a
keyboard
rather than a mouse; and advice on how to make Adobe pdf files more
accessible.

Other winners included Birmingham Focus on Blindness, which also
received a British Interactive Media Association award last week
(http://www.bima.co.uk/content_awards/2003-shortlist.html); and The
Bradshaws Online (http://www.thebradshaws.biz), the web site of a
radio comedy show about a working class Mancunian in the 1960s. It
started life as a cult late-night show on Manchester's Piccadilly
Radio
and is now syndicated to stations worldwide.

Darren Poyzer, designer of The Bradshaws Online, describes himself
as "one guy who works out of a bedroom," who initially designed the
site as a favour for a friend. He says: "We were under no brief to
create
an accessible version of the web site, there was no political
motivation.
It was just a natural thing to do - because it's radio, we probably
have a
bigger vision-impaired following."

Poyzer says he incorporated the accessible version of the web site
within the theme of the site, in a black and white "traditional"
version.
"I undid all the science and used a bit of common sense. You've got
to
look at things from the user's point of view, not always a technical
point of view".

Why does he think he won the award? "[At the ceremony], the first
message was that it is so easy to navigate, and it's enjoyable",
Poyzer
says. "I'm certainly no expert: a visually impaired person has tapped
into a web site I've done and it's worked."

Poyzer said he was "overwhelmed by the enthusiasm" of one vision-
impaired woman he met at the ceremony who had nominated the site.
"That was the award," he said.

[Section three ends].


++SECTION FOUR: OPINION
- TECHSHARE 2003.

+13: A NEW ERA OF REALISM?
by Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

The fourth Techshare conference on the role of technology in the
everyday lives of people with sight problems marked a watershed in
the way that ICT for visually impaired people is viewed both by their
own advocates and by industry. The conference was hosted by the
RNIB in Birmingham last month (http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare -
see also story 02, News, this issue).

On the advocacy side, the fact that most people with sight problems
are
more concerned about being able to use consumer electronics and
telephones than home computers seems to have finally hit home. And
on the industry side, in a volte face of spectacular proportions, the
major players Microsoft and Vodafone admitted that the world was not
divided between a handful of severely disabled and troublesome people
on the one hand and an overwhelming majority of able and satisfied
people on the other. They finally discovered the disability
continuum:
from total blindness to reading problems with standard format on-
screen text.

What bliss! We are no longer part of the awkward squad, but an
important market segment; and the industry objective is not to bury
us
but to praise us!

The fact that the technology industry's Damascene conversion has
arrived so late is a direct reflection of the vision impairment
sector's
past tendency to focus on proper but minority concerns about
accessing
technology in education and employment. But as access to television,
radio, mobile phones and the like are more mainstream concerns
shared by almost all people with impaired vision, it is right that
there
has now been a shift of emphasis towards these household devices.

It is also appropriate that the two people who are most responsible
for
this change of attitude can share the credit for Techshare's success.
The
RNIB's Richard Orme and Steve Tyler have, in their various ways,
broadened the horizon of the whole sector to think about DVDs and
phones as well as word processing and computer programming. So
often accused of being backward looking, this is an area where RNIB
is miles ahead of most of the rest of the vision impairment sector.

This has been achieved not least because the institute has
increasingly
moved towards evidence based policy-making, exemplified by the
early results of the 'uses of technology' research carried out by
City
University: watch this space.

The other great pleasure of Techshare this year was the reduced
amount of 'technophilia' and a much increased recognition of human
factors. Even when access technology works - and the failure rate is
depressingly but predictably high from a hitherto fragmented market
of
small niche suppliers - the key to interactive success is self
confidence
and a feeling of being in control. On these points the debate is much
better balanced.

A third welcome change of tone worth noting at this year's event was
an apparent new willingness among lobby groups to come to terms
with the technological and regulatory complexities of the access
agenda. Most delegates were certainly less stridently dogmatic this
year; the subordinate clause has, so to speak, come home.

All this may well be a false dawn. As technologies advance, the
comparative disadvantage between people with sight problems and the
rest of the world widens in spite of solid progress; and if the
commercial sector's objective is to use soft language to try ward off
trouble, it would not be the first time.

Overall, however, it would be wrong to end on a negative note.
Techshare was a fine and varied collage of snapshots of where we are
now. Its challenge will be to work out a way to fascinate us now that
neither acrimony nor a search for paradise remain on the agenda.

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as
'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck mel@headstar.com
Correspondent - Phil Cain phil@vitalpublishing.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
