+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 38, FEBRUARY 2003.

Technology news for people with visual impairment
(http://www.e-accessibility.com).

Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk)
and National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard. For example, all items are numbered. For details see:
http://www.headstar.com/ten


++ISSUE 38 CONTENTS.

- Section one: News.

01: Audio description subsidy bid
- RNIB seeks millions from culture ministry.

02: Concern over direction of European law
- access appears to be low priority.

03: Guidelines for accessible online forms
- company aims to set the standard.

04: Signals from space through the internet
- testing for wireless navigation technology.

05: The dating game
- Valentine's role-play sets pulses racing.

News in brief: 06: Reading aloud - talking newspaper online; 07:
Braille India: first course begins; 08: Raised awareness: digital radio
information in Braille.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
09: Sound response - national archive director writes; 10: Career
guidance - job-hunting advice; 11: Machine quest - copying machine
wanted; 12: Ah so - karate lessons.

13: Section three: Report - Digital politics
- Voices for change: As the Communications bill proceeds through
Parliament, Mel Poluck reports on a mass lobby at the House of
Commons that urged MPs to beef up its access provisions.

14: Section four: Debate - Web testing
- Seeing it wrong? Some aspects of web site accessibility are clear-cut
but others reside in a more subjective 'grey area'. Mel Poluck
adjudicates.

15: Section five: Technology review - Talking books
 - Pick of the DAISY players: Phil Cain looks at a range of e-book
players: those on the UK market and those available in the coming
months.

[Contents ends.]


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.


+01: AUDIO-DESCRIPTION SUBSIDY BID.

The RNIB is to urge the government to subsidise the technology
needed to receive audio-described digital television, to ensure
affordable access to description for all who need it, E-Access Bulletin
has learned.

A proposal will be delivered to broadcasting minister Kim Howells
later this month for three million pounds to subsidise the production of
around 20,000 plug-in cards to allow users to access audio description
on Freeview, the digital terrestrial service run by a consortium headed
by the BBC.

If successful the bid could see audio description available later this
year to visually impaired people at a cost of two hundred and fifty
pounds - 110 pounds for the card and 150 pounds for the set-top
decoder box.

When inserted into Freeview decoders the cards, designed by SCM
Microsystems (http://www.scmmicro.com), allow viewers to play an
audio description track over headphones or through an amplifier into
loudspeakers. Many hours of audio described programming are
produced by the BBC, ITV, Channel Four and Channel Five each
week, but go unwatched because there is no suitable decoder on the
market.

Alongside the funding bid, the plug-in is due to be tested by 45 people
who have been part of a group assessing broadcasters' audio
description output using makeshift technology for the past three years
run by the Digital Network, a consortium of broadcasters. The man
running the trial, Jim Slater, does not expect the change to the units
to present any technical problem.
"Everybody who has audio description loves it," says Slater. "The only
negative feedback is that there is not enough."

NOTE: Audio descriptions of video e-learning material could be
automated by technology being developed by French company Ecrans
Magique. The company, which specialises in technology that
categorises online content, is looking for research partners to
collaborate on 'VoxVision'. Interested companies or universities
should contact director Jean-Paul Decle on jpdecle@wanadoo.fr .


+02: CONCERN OVER DIRECTION OF EUROPEAN LAW.

Plans for European legislation designed to ensure widespread access to
digital television and third generation mobile services need to be
radically reconsidered if they are to protect the rights of people with
disabilities, according to international lobby groups.

The legislation, which is scheduled to be considered by the European
Parliament by the end of 2003, will set out a framework within which
broadcasting and communications regulators in EU member states will
operate to ensure that interactive communications services are widely
available.

However, at a meeting with the European Commission on 4 February,
disability groups expressed concern that a report outlining the proposed
direction of the legislation (http://fastlink.headstar.com/EU5) focuses
on rolling out the technology infrastructure and the costs of services
but overlooks the needs of people with disabilities.

"We were amazed that the commission can put out a report on access
to services without mentioning accessibility," said Cathy Toscan of the
European Design for All e-Accessibility Network (http://www.e-accessibility.org).
According to Toscan, the commission has "promised
to take a closer look at accessibility issues" before a final report is
drawn up.

Separately, the commission has supported a proposal for a UN
Convention that would protect and promote the rights of disabled
people, which is scheduled to be discussed at a UN committee meeting
in June. The European Disability Forum campaign group
(http://www.edf-feph.org/en/welcome.htm) welcomed the move but
emphasised that support from member states is essential. "Because of
UN regulations, member states must negotiate as individuals rather
than as communities, so it is important for ministers of foreign
affairs to know about this issue and support it," said a spokesperson.

+03: GUIDELINES FOR ACCESSIBLE ONLINE FORMS.

Guidelines to help developers design accessible online forms were
published this month by forms software company Mandoforms
(http://www.mandoforms.com).

The Manchester-based firm began drafting the guidance after an RNIB
audit in August last year identified potential access problems with its
forms.

According to product manager Kevin Trembath, the many accessibility
pitfalls for online forms include not allowing people to use the
keyboard to move the cursor between fields in a form; to make error
messages hard for people using screen-readers by not putting them at
the top of the screen; or to use a colour such as red to indicate there
is a problem.

To provide an accessible form using the current version of
Mandoforms software, version 4.1, designers need to provide a
separate page. But the next version of the software will allow designers
to make just one version accessible to everyone, Trembath says. "Our
overall goal is universal design."

To view a text version of the guide visit:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/mando1

And to submit comments visit:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/mando2


+04: SIGNALS FROM SPACE THROUGH THE INTERNET.

Detailed spoken navigation instructions in an outdoor environment,
accurate to 'a few metres', could be made available to visually
impaired people with new satellite and wireless internet technology
being tested this month by volunteers from ONCE, Spain's national
organisation of the blind (http://www.once.es).

Until now, positioning data from satellites has only been accurate to
around 40 metres, and connections are easily lost in areas with tall
buildings and underpasses.

The volunteers will test a small navigator that can be carried in a
shoulder bag. The device, developed by GMV Sistemas
(http://www.gmvsistemas.es), combines data from satellites and mobile
phone networks to deliver location information in voice and Braille
formats. Because the system uses phone networks, systems could also
be developed to allow users to request location-specific directions or
assistance.

The satellite positioning data for the service is provided by the
European Space Agency via an internet-enabled network called
SISNet, which stands for 'signal-in-space through the internet' (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/sisnet).


+05: THE DATING GAME.

A virtual dating game launched by the RNIB for Valentine's Day aims
to prove that accessible web sites do not have to be boring.

'RNIB Blind Date: an accessible game for Valentine's Day'
(http://rnibblinddate.nomensa.com) uses Flash animation to lead the
player through an interactive adventure in which players have a choice
of who to take on their blind date and where to go. In one possible
story, players can take the sophisticated Tara to the cinema to watch
an
audio-described film; in another, you can invite James the 'technology
genius' (or is that computer geek?) to a party (tip: order him a pizza).
Just like in real life, depending on the choices made the evening can
turn out to be a success or a disaster.

Developed for the RNIB by design company Nomensa
(http://www.nomensa.com), the game can be used with standard screen
reader software. It was produced as part of the institute's campaign
for good web design (http://www.rnib.org.uk/digital) to make web
designers aware of accessibility guidelines.

A poll undertaken to coincide with the launch to find the UK's best
looking celebrity saw Tony Blair out-voted by over-weight comedian
Johnny Vegas. That proved, according to the RNIB, that love is indeed
blind.


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+06: READING ALOUD: The German newspaper Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung (http://www.faz.com) has become the first to
launch a web site producing text-to-speech output and accepting
speech input. The voice portal, 'FAZ.NET Fonservice' uses ScanSoft's
RealSpeak software (http://www.scansoft.com/realspeak) to translate
commands such as "news" or "traffic" to access content. For a report
by European speech technology site 'Euromap' see:
 http://www.hltcentral.org/page-1058.shtml

+07: BRAILLE INDIA: A computer driven facility opened last week
in the north western Indian city of Ahmedabad which will allow up to
ten students to study Braille under the instruction of a single teacher.
Run by the Blind People's Association (India), it is the first facility
of its kind in the country:
http://www.bpaindia.org

+08: RAISED AWARENESS: Information packs about digital radio
services in the UK are now available in Braille, the Digital Radio
Development Bureau has announced. The information in the pack also
mentions products available, prices and coverage information. To
request a Braille pack, call 08707 747474 or visit:
http://www.digitalradionow.com

[Section one ends.]


++SPECIAL NOTICE: 'ACCESS IT' AND 'COMPUTE IT'
- MONTHLY TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINES FROM RNIB.

'Access IT' provides computer access technology information of
particular interest to blind and partially sighted people. It features
articles both for the novice and experienced user. 'Compute IT' is
designed for the computer enthusiast/amateur and will bring you the
latest information on hardware and software developments.

To subscribe to either of these magazines by email, Braille or disk, at
a cost of 49 pence an issue, email RNIB Customer Services at
cservices@rnib.org.uk
or call 0845 702 3153

[Special notice ends.]


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+09: SOUND RESPONSE: Crispin Jewitt, director of the National
Sound Archive (NSA) at the British Library, has written in to respond
to Clive Lever's account of negative experiences when visiting the
archive (see E-Access Bulletin, issue 36, December 2002).

He says: "Provision of services for the visually impaired has greatly
improved since Clive's first visit in the early 1990s to the Victorian
premises then occupied by the NSA. The new British Library at St
Pancras incorporates far more facilities for the disabled.

"To deal with the points relating to Clive's visits, I assure your
readers that the library makes no charge to those wishing to access its
collection and there never has been any question of users having to
'pay up first . and take your chance'. The catalogue of the NSA is
available on the library's website (http://www.bl.uk) and on terminals
in public areas.

"The British Library now has a readers' adviser whose role is to help
users with disabilities to make the most of its facilities. Help
available ranges from assistance with forms for readers' passes to escorting
readers around the building and introducing them to the specialist
equipment available in the reading rooms. For NSA users specialist
staff are available to show users to the study carrels and explain how
to use the equipment.

"For readers with visual impairments, some leaflets are available in
large print format and on tape. In addition the library issues passes
to those assisting readers with disabilities and assistance dogs are also
welcome in the reading rooms.

"The library is committed to improving the level of service it offers
to users with disabilities and welcomes feedback. I hope this sets the
record straight and trust that Clive's next visit to the library will
be a 100 per cent joyful experience."


+10: CAREER GUIDANCE: Chris Gregory from Opsis, a group of
blindness support charities in Birmingham, has information for Ellen
Bedford of Connecticut who wrote in last month seeking assistance in
starting a high school job club for visually impaired and blind
students.

"There is a group that meets in this country twice-yearly called the VI
Colleges Employment and Careers Advisers Group," he says.

"The most recent meeting was last Wednesday, when Sue Murphy and
Sarah Lang-Jones of Action for Blind People showed us a number of
impressive job search modules that they have developed and which
will be available in the near future. Sue has said she is happy to be
contacted on 020 7635 4835 or email sue_m@afbp.org ."


+11: MACHINE QUEST: Katy Dymoke of the Manchester-based arts
group Touchdown Dance is still looking for an audio cassette copying
machine, new or second-hand. If anyone has one to sell please email
touchdd@aol.com .


+12: AH SO: Ever thought about taking up martial arts? E-Access
Bulletin reader Terry Taylor is a karate instructor based in Kent who
runs weekly sessions for people with disabilities including visual
impairment. For more information and to find out about a martial arts
festival for disabled people in December - all very welcome regardless
of ability or experience - see Terry's web site at
http://www.twt.org.uk
or email terry.taylor@dial.pipex.com

[Section two ends].


++SPONSORED NOTICE: 'CSUN' 2003 INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCE.

The 18th annual international conference on 'Technology and persons
with disabilities', hosted by the Center on Disabilities at California
State University (CSUN), will be held at the Hilton and Marriott hotels
at Los Angeles Airport from 17 to 22 March, 2003.

The event is the longest-running and largest annual university-
sponsored conference in its field, and serves as a major training venue
for professionals worldwide involved in disability and technology.

A preregistration brochure is now available. For more information
telephone +1 (818) 6772578 (Voice/TTY compatible service); email
ctrdis@csun.edu or visit:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf

[Sponsored notice ends.]


++: SECTION THREE: REPORT
- DIGITAL POLITICS.

+13: VOICES FOR CHANGE.
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com .

Hundreds of visually impaired and deaf-blind lobbyists from across the
UK descended on Parliament last week to protest that their needs in
accessing vital new technologies such as digital television were set to
be bypassed by the new Communications Bill
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/bill1) currently before the Commons.

The RNIB-organised lobby was convened to press for some 57
amendments to the bill, and the atmosphere as the protestors filled
Westminster Hall to corner their MPs was one of indignance.

Lesley Kelly, honorary secretary of the UK National Federation of the
Blind (http://www.nfbuk.org) said: "We are hoping that someone will
take notice of the fact blind people need access to the TV and radio
and
that the publicity will make people notice. What bothers me is that no
one really seems aware of the need for telecommunications to be
accessible: the manufacturers need to know."

The lobby's organisers urged visually impaired technology users - who
are the experts on these issues, after all - to explain to their MPs
the daily usability problems that they encounter, such as remote control
handset buttons which often use colour to distinguish between
functions. One suggestion for a practical demonstration was to ask
MPs to cover up their mobile phone screen with a label and then ask
them to attempt to use it.

As a minimum, lobbyists want to see all their proposed amendments
established as guidelines for the new communications 'super-regulator'
Ofcom (http://www.ofcom.org.uk), which becomes operational later
this year.

The RNIB supports the creation of a single regulator for the
communications, internet and broadcasting industries because this may
provide an effective joined-up approach to tackling accessibility
obstacles. However lobbyists wanted to see increased pressure on
Ofcom to use its powers to promote universal access and 'inclusive'
product design with an enforceable framework that will ensure
improved access to electronic programme guides, the text menus that
will be a key feature of digital television.

Some lobbyists said they felt angry for paying for services for which
they cannot reap the full benefits. "We are subsidising the whole
service but not receiving it completely," one person told E-Access
Bulletin. "We want every piece of menu-driven media equipment to be
accessible for all."

Among key objectives demanded by the lobby on the day was that
audio description be included not on ten per cent of all broadcasts -
as laid out in the bill - but be increased to 50 per cent over a ten year
period. They also sought a guarantee that the audio description will be
receivable on all digital platforms at a price which is not
significantly more expensive than standard equipment.

While there is the occasional late-night audio described broadcast on
terrestrial television, Sky Digital is the only digital service to
offer basic audio-description. Sky now carries listings of audio described
programmes on its web site and is working on providing the service via
telephone (http://www1.sky.com/disability/tvguide.htm). The RNIB
wants others to follow suit, and would like to see description made
available through software downloads, although this would still require
set-top boxes and televisions to be upgraded.

"We do not want expensive add-ons," said Chris Friend of Sightsavers
International and the World Blind Union.

Mary Ghatineh, a deafblind lobbyist, said: "I hope to raise awareness
of the specific needs that people with sensory loss face each day when
they want to use information and communication equipment. Now its
going to be digital, these people will find it worse. I want the
government to make changes so digital equipment manufacturers will
consider accessible formats."

New communications technologies have the potential to bring strong
practical and financial advantages to the growing section of society
with visual and combined dual sensory impairments: the ability to
shop, to email a care worker, to vote, to check the entertainments
listings, to book a taxi, or pay bills. However, the protestors said that
if MPs fail to act now, people with sight problems even stand to lose out
on access to radio services in the digital era.

As Labour backbencher MP Dr Roger Berry told the gathering: "We
have the technology, we can make communications technology
accessible, all we need now is the political will."

[Section three ends.]


++: SECTION FOUR: DEBATE
- WEB TESTING.

+14: SEEING IT WRONG?
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com .

The RNIB's web accessibility audit scheme, 'See it Right,'
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/digital/siraccess/), checks sites for ease of
use by visually impaired users. To receive a logo that denotes it has
'passed,' a site must attain what the RNIB describes as a 'reasonable
standard of accessibility', and is then subject to annual re-audits.

See it Right uses test reviewers to visit and check sites rather than
simply using automated review software, and bases its checks on the
international standards set out by the World Wide Web consortium's
Web Accessibility Initiative (http://www.w3.org/TR/WAI-
WEBCONTENT). Auditors check, for example, that all images have
text alternatives and check that links have clear destinations. Detailed
reports are then compiled with any examples of inaccessible features.

Users are also encouraged to report inaccessibility on sites bearing
the logo (by emailing webaccess@rnib.org.uk.) and the RNIB estimates
that bringing sites up to standard is equivalent to one to two per cent
of original design costs (for more on 'See it Right' see E-Access
Bulletin, issues 26 and 31, February and July 2002).

The process is being watched with particular interest by public sector
bodies, since government guidelines require public agencies including
local councils to ensure their web sites are accessible. Last week
Welwyn Hatfield Council (http://www.welhat.gov.uk) became the first
English local authority to receive the accreditation, following
Wrexham council in Wales (http://www.wrexham.gov.uk).

Other public sector sites to have passed the audit include the main
government web portal UKOnline (http://www.ukonline.gov.uk),
Greater Manchester Police (http://www.gmp.police.uk), the Criminal
Justice site (http://www.cjsonline.org), and the local government
Improvement and Development Agency (http://www.idea.gov.uk).

As with all systems of accessibility audit however, the RNIB initiative
has its critics, who are quick to pounce on any apparent
inaccessibilities which remain even after sites gain the stamp of
approval.

According to Welwyn Hatfield, its site received the See it Right logo
thanks to an appropriate font size; simple layout; the option of using
a text only version; the use of descriptive tags to explain the content
of pictures; easy-to-use navigation and little or no use of complex
graphics. It also offers the ability to change typeface.

However Tavis Reddick, a web publishing technologist, told E-Access
Bulletin this week that he has found an array of inaccessibilities on
the council's site including moving text on the home page; and use of a
smaller-than-average font size.

"If this is held up to other designers as an accessible website template,
then it could be very damaging to future accessibility design," he says.

His comments highlight the fact that, alongside a range of accessibility
features which are fairly simple to assess, there are many areas where
best practice is more a matter of opinion, and much may depend on
context and the expert assessment of the site testers.

Henny Swan, Website Accessibility Best Practice Officer at the RNIB,
told E-Access Bulletin: "This is exactly the kind of feedback that is
good as it provides us with the opportunity to discuss the areas of
accessibility that fall into the 'grey' or 'judgement' areas, where
interpretation of the WAI guidelines is required."

"With regards to blinking text, according to our See it Right guidelines
this is acceptable, if the rotation is both slow and rests after 3-5
cycles. As with all instances of blinking text in sites that we audit a
subjective
decision is made as to how the image affects the page and the scope of
causing problems for people accessing the page and whether blinking
text has been used extensively in the site."

"In Welwyn Hatfield's case there is one image that rotates every three
seconds which is considered slow. There is also a very small amount of
text on the two sides of the images which makes it easier to read. In
addition to this there is a text link directly below the image for users
to access and the image is tucked away at the bottom of the page. All of
this creates a strong case for passing the site, especially given
blinking text has not been used elsewhere."

"That said, the instance of blinking text was not on the home page
when the site went through both the initial audit and the re-audit
which shows how problematic is to monitor sites once audited. This also
displays how useful it is to get feedback from users! I have been in
touch with Welwyn Hatfield to notify them of the issue."

The issue of 'less-than-average' font size was also one discussed with
the council, Swan said . "The font size on the page is fixed, however
an 'accessible alternative' is provided in the form of buttons to switch
text size from the browser default to 16-, 14- and 12-point sizes. These
images also have alternative text links at the bottom of the page."

"As this is an accessible alternative, the site passed the audit
checkpoints. Again this is a unique case and one that requires judgment
and interpretation of the WAI Guidelines."

Clearly all this means that automatic software checking can never offer
the same sophistication of assessment as human checkers. "Automated
checking tools can only provide 55 per cent accessibility checks, and
some guidelines may fail an automated check as the tools are unable to
detect an accessible alternative," Swan says. Subjective it may be, but
human judgment seems to be the best system we have for accessibility
testing.

[Section four ends.]


++: SECTION FIVE: PRODUCT REVIEW
- TALKING BOOKS.

+15: PICK OF THE DAISY PLAYERS.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com .

The DAISY digital book format, developed by an international
consortium of talking book libraries formed in 1996
(http://www.daisy.org), has many advantages to visually impaired
people.

The ability to bookmark a page and search the text for key words
makes it far easier to find the appropriate section, particularly in
complex reference works. Also extremely useful is the ability to speed
up and slow down recorded speech without changing its pitch.
Meanwhile the option to record in MP3 format, which compresses data
up to 12 times, allows more audio material to be fitted onto fewer
discs.

With no DAISY player hardware manufactured in the UK, however,
until recently the only way to get hold of a player in the UK has been
to import one from abroad, a process fraught with pitfalls. Even after
the user has managed to modify the power supply and translate the
instructions, he or she will still only have access to technical
support in another country.

In December last year the RNIB began to address this gap by selling
the Victor Reader Pro player from Canada-based company Visuaide.
According to marketing manager Tom Whittle, some 40 Victor Reader
Pros have been sold so far at a price of 350 pounds, despite a lack of
publicity. Among the keenest customers for the device are educational
bodies, says Whittle. Unlike its rivals, the Pro is designed to cater
for the sophisticated reading needs of students, with a number pad making
it easy to skip between numbered pages easily (for a review of this
reader by Saqib Shaikh, see E-Access Bulletin issue 27, March 2002).

In the coming months three other hardware DAISY book players are
set to join the Victor Pro on full UK release, and as with this player
the RNIB aims to ensure they conform to UK safety standards and are
adequately documented, and will also provide users with ongoing local
support.

One of the most eagerly awaited DAISY machines among technology
buffs is the Japanese-built Plextalk PTR1
(http://www.plextalk.org/plextalk_portable.html), due to go on sale at
the end of March. Combining the portability of the Telex and having
the numeric keypad functions of Victor Pro, the machine also allows
people to record DAISY books on the move. There has already been
interest in this device from the BBC, Whittle says, whose radio
journalists - visually impaired or not - may find its recording and
indexing useful in the field. The price tag of around 800 pounds means,
however, the machine is likely to be the preserve of the professional
and enthusiastic amateur.

Next to appear will be Visuaide's scaled down Victor Classic
(http://www.visuaide.com/victorclassic.html), which is expected to
come on sale in April following RNIB testing. Unlike the Pro it does
not have a numeric keypad and is less easily moved, having no integral
rechargeable battery pack. Priced at around 280 pounds plus VAT it
hopes to find users, possibly older people, who are happy to sacrifice
high-sophistication for lower cost and operational simplicity.

Another lower cost option will be the Telex player
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/telex), which will go on sale in May for
around 175 pounds. The machine's design is based on the 'clam shell'
design commonly used for market portable CD players, which will
make it far more easy to carry around than either the Victor Classic or
Pro.

To place an order for any of the machines mentioned above contact the
RNIB on 0845 7023153; email cservices@rnib.org.uk or visit the
online shop at:
http://onlineshop.rnib.org.uk/storefront.asp
Or if you want to keep informed of latest availability please email
your contact details to:
ict@rnib.org.uk .

[Section five ends.]


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337

[Issue ends.]
