+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 37, JANUARY 2003.

Technology news for people with visual impairment
(http://www.e-accessibility.com).

Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk)
and National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard. For example, all items are numbered. For details see:
http://www.headstar.com/ten


++ISSUE 37 CONTENTS.

- Section one: News.

01: EU expansion threatens anti-discrimination law
- new member states may stall legislation.

02: Mass communications protest set for February
- Parliamentary lobby over Communications Bill.

03: Effectiveness doubts over e-government champion
- access low priority for new US administrator.

04: First graduates from access training course
- two teachers certified.

05: Writing competition winners online
- the best of the entries.

News in brief:  06: Link up - sight loss quarterly; 07: ITCH awareness
- free IT assistance; 08: Rogue mail - anti-spam measure hits visually
impaired.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
09: Shared vision - on information points; 10: Transatlantic viewing -
accessible TV nation?; 11: Job club - help needed; 12: Spanish
geometry - Braille text book appeal.

13: Section three: Focus - multiple disability
- A complex web of support: Nearly half the visually impaired
community have further special needs. Phil Cain looks at some of the
technology solutions open to them.

14: Section four: Technology - 'thin clients'
- Return to the bad old days? You may have thought mainframe
computers and 'dumb terminals' have been consigned to history, but
new 'thin client' networks have many of the same characteristics - and
access problems. Dan Jellinek reports.

15: Section five: Viewpoint - product design
- Seeking out common ground: Small differences between
manufacturers in the design of telephone keypads and television
remotes can cause visually impaired people a great deal of difficulty.
Kevin Carey says everyone would gain if companies agreed on
standard layouts.

[Contents ends.]


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: EU EXPANSION THREATENS ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
LAW.

The expanded European Union negotiated by its members in December
- with ten new member states joining by 2004 and three others in due
course - could delay progress on toughening up anti-discrimination
laws by up to five years, according to the European Disability Forum
(EDF - http://www.edf-feph.org).

It is feared that new entrant countries, where progress on anti-
discrimination is less well-advanced, could block moves by the forum
to include access to goods and services in EU anti-discrimination
legislation. At present EU laws only prevent discrimination in
education and the workplace (http://fastlink.headstar.com/EU4).

"We're working with other groups to try to and change the voting
mechanism to qualified majority voting instead of unanimous support,
but this is going to be extremely difficult," an EDF spokesperson told
E-Access Bulletin.

On the positive side, the fact that this year is the European Year of
People with Disabilities (http://www.eypd2003.org) could provide an
opportunity for campaigners to win support for the desired changes.

The centrepiece of the European year, which launches officially at the
end of January in Athens, will be a session of the European Parliament
drawing together disability campaign groups and aid organisations
across Europe. Representatives will discuss proposals such as a UN
Convention for Persons with Disabilities. A date for the Parliament has
yet to be approved, but it is likely to take place in November.


+02: MASS COMMUNICATIONS PROTEST SET FOR
FEBRUARY.

A mass lobby being organised by the RNIB for 4 February will aim to
force the UK government to make amendments to its Communications
Bill to ensure digital TV, radio and mobile phones are accessible to
everyone.

The institute is expecting up to 500 people to convene at the House of
Commons to express dissatisfaction at the bill, currently proceeding
through Parliament, which will set the standards for the digitisation
of
television and radio. Caroline Ellis, Parliamentary manager at the
RNIB, said: "The objectives are not woolly-minded - there are precise
amendments we want made to the bill."

Among the protestors' demands is the raising of the prescribed quota
of audio description for TV programmes from ten to 50 per cent over
ten years; and ensuring accessibility of digital products and services
such as remote controls and electronic programme guides. Lobbyists
want to see all such amendments established as guidelines for the new
communications 'super-regulator' OFCOM
(http://www.ofcom.gov.uk).

Direct lobbying for change by disability groups has seen success in the
past, with groups representing deaf people for example winning
increased TV subtitle quotas.

The February rally, which is supported by seven other organisations
including the British Computer Association of the Blind and the Guide
Dogs for the Blind Association, begins at 2pm at Westminster Hall in
the House of Commons. A coach will take people from RNIB Judd
Street in Kings Cross to Westminster. For more information email
campaign@rnib.org.uk or telephone 0207 3912123.


+03: EFFECTIVENESS DOUBTS OVER E-GOVERNMENT
CHAMPION.

The forthcoming appointment of a US e-government policy champion
is unlikely to speed up the process of opening online public services
to
citizens with disabilities, a former Washington policy chief told E-
Access Bulletin this week.

The country's new E-Government Act, signed into law by President
Bush in December, provides for the appointment of an E-Government
Administrator to help shape and implement national policy, including
compliance with accessibility standards for government contracts set
out in section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act
(http://www.section508.gov).

However consultant Timothy Sprehe, a former senior policymaker at
the US Office of Management and Budget, said the new champion
would not make much difference to implementation of accessibility
law as responsibility for the field would be shared with existing
agencies such as the Center for Information Technology
Accommodation. In the absence of a stronger mandate for the new
champion these agencies would continue to take the lead, Sprehe said.

"The administrator is more likely to perform oversight of the center's
activities, arguing that under his or her oversight the center is doing
the
job well enough," he told E-Access Bulletin.

Furthermore, a recent report in US publication Government Computer
News suggests that current initiatives are making slow progress
implementing section 508. Many government departments are reported
to only be adapting their services a year beyond the deadline for
compliance (http://fastlink.headstar.com/fcn).

To see a copy of the new E-Government Act visit the Congress library
service at http://thomas.loc.gov and enter bill number HR.2458.ENR in
the search box.


+04: FIRST GRADUATES FROM ACCESS TRAINING COURSE.

Two UK-based computer access technology trainers this month
became the first to win recognition of their skills from the British
Computer Association of the Blind's Trainer Certification Scheme
(BCTS).

The RNIB-backed BCTS (http://www.bcab.org.uk/btcs) is intended to
ensure access training in the UK is of a consistently high standard
(see
'The battle for recognition', section four, E-Access Bulletin December
2002). More than 50 trainers are currently enrolled on the
certification
scheme, 30 of whom are expected to qualify by the summer of 2003.

However, the scheme has drawn criticism from access consultant Brian
Hartgen (http://hartgen.org.uk), who complained in a letter posted onto
the 'access-uk' email list
(http://groups.yahoo.com/group/access-uk/message/30740)
that there is no compulsory 'blind-awareness' element to the course,
ensuring trainers understand the basics of communicating clearly with
blind people.

Manager of the course Steve Plumpton defended it saying a voluntary
awareness class was available and that awareness would be part of the
final assessment. He said attempts had been made to improve the
awareness aspect of the course, but admitted he was unsure whether
they had been adequately implemented.

Hartgen also complained the course costs too much at 1,500 pounds.
However, Plumpton said an RNIB subsidy currently cuts the cost to the
customer from over 4,000 pounds.

The first two to qualify were Charles Clark, a resource worker for the
Grampian Society for the Blind
(http://www.grampianblind.demon.co.uk), and Barry Coates, an RNIB
access technology trainer. Both received their certificate for their
ability to train people in the use of the JAWS screen reader.


+05: WRITING COMPETITION WINNERS ONLINE.

The ten prize wining stories entered into E-Access Bulletin's recent
writing competition on the theme of 'keeping in touch with technology'
have been published online.

The stories offer fascinating insights into the profound effects new
technologies can or could have on the lives of visually impaired
people. The collection can be viewed as a text file at:
http://www.e-accessibility.com/kit-winners.txt .


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+06: LINK UP: 'Link Line' is a free quarterly magazine for people with
sight loss and their families and carers, from the charity Positive
Vision. It is available in large print, on tape and on disk. Other
services
provided by the group include a long-term loan scheme for
unemployed people for equipment such as screen readers, and
computer advice over the phone:
http://www.positivevision.co.uk .

+07: ITCH AWARENESS: The ITCH Network is the new name for
the former 'IT Can Help' project of the British Computer Society
Disability Group. The relaunched network provides free technical
assistance and advice in homes and day centres for people with
disabilities in 10 UK regions:
http://www.itcanhelp.org.uk .

+08: ROGUE MAIL: A new graphic 'distortion puzzle' technique that
prevents automated spammers from signing up for free email accounts,
by requiring a human to read them and solve them, could block access
to people with visual impairments and assistive equipment, according
to a BBC report. The systems are known as 'Captchas', which stands
for Completely Automated Public Turing tests to tell Computers and
Humans Apart:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/2635855.stm .

[Section one ends.]


++SPONSORED NOTICE: CREATING OPPORTUNITIES FOR
PEOPLE WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES.

A two day conference 'Computers - creating choice and opportunities
for people with learning disabilities', including talks, workshops and
an exhibition aimed at those working with adults with learning
disabilities, is to be held on 27 and 28 June at Keele University,
North
Staffordshire.

To reserve a place at 235 pounds which includes one night's
accommodation, all food and conference dinner please contact Sue
Wilshaw on s.j.wilshaw@psy.keele.ac.uk . An early booking discount
is available.

[Sponsored notice ends.]


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+09: SHARED VISION: Last issue Mary Gwynne of Swansea Council
wrote in to ask for advice on the software needed for computers and
information points accessible to the public in libraries. David Owen,
executive director of the 'Share the vision' project at the National
Library for the Blind, suggested Mary should consult chapter 13 of the
project's 'Library services for visually impaired people: a manual of
best practice'.

"Although we donated a hard copy to Swansea and every other public
library authority in the UK, this is such a rapidly changing area that
I
would advise her to check the web version at
http://www.nlbuk.org/bpm because the relevant chapter has been
updated by Sally Cain of RNIB," he says.

Mike Williams of the leading computing and disability charity
AbilityNet added: "Mary may like to talk to her local AbilityNet centre
about our services including 'Accessible IT kits'. These are designed
to
help organisations who offer IT facilities to the public make their
computers accessible to all users." The AbilityNet centre for the West
of England and Wales can be reached by telephone on 0117 3127362
or email: ligia@abilitynet.org.uk .

+10: TRANSATLANTIC VIEWING: Jerry Weichbrodt of Livonia,
Michigan, USA writes to say he was interested to read about the
research on how effectively various types of user can interact with
digital television technology (see issue 36, December 2002, section
five).

"I would like to know if similar efforts are taking place in North
America where over-the-air digital television broadcasting is gathering
steam," he says. "It would seem that there could be room for
collaboration in this area and that viewers on both sides of the
Atlantic
could benefit. As with so many technologies, accessibility is easiest
if
planned for during the early development stages."
Responses please to inbox@headstar.com .


+11: JOB CLUB: Ellen Bedford of Bridgeport, Connecticut says she
found out about E-Access Bulletin through the eSight Careers network
(http://www.esight.org), which helps visually impaired people find
fulfilling employment. She says: "I hope to be starting a job club in
my
high school for visually impaired and blind students. Please send me
any information that might be helpful for them."
Responses please to inbox@headstar.com .


+12: SPANISH GEOMETRY: A sixth-form level maths teacher from
Mexico writes in to say: "After 15 years of teaching, I have the honour
of having a very intelligent blind girl as one of my pupils. In the
first
term, I taught her geometry and I'm looking for a Spanish language
geometry book in Braille. Its so hard to find one! Our 'multisensory'
culture is very backwards." If any readers can help please email
inbox@headstar.com

[Section two ends].


++SPONSORED NOTICE: 'CSUN' 2003 INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE.

The 18th annual international conference on 'Technology and persons
with disabilities', hosted by the Center on Disabilities at California
State University (CSUN), will be held at the Hilton and Marriott hotels
at Los Angeles Airport from March 17-22, 2003.

The event is the longest-running and largest annual university-
sponsored conference in its field, and serves as a major training venue
for professionals worldwide involved in disability and technology.

A preregistration brochure is now available. For more information
telephone (818) 6772578 (Voice/TTY compatible service); email
ctrdis@csun.edu or visit our web site:
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf

[Sponsored notice ends.]


++13: SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- MULTIPLE DISABILITY.

+A COMPLEX WEB OF SUPPORT.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com .

Visually impaired people often have additional special needs: among
the visually impaired adults under 60 surveyed by the RNIB in 1991,
some 46 per cent said they had another "limiting permanent illness or
disability". In the population at large the figure is 16 per cent.

There is a strong need, therefore, for computer systems serving those
with physical, mental or sensory impairments to also cater for those
with low or no vision.

The problem of supporting multiple needs is complex, since the further
needs of the visually impaired are, naturally, as diverse as those of
the
wider population. But among the many different combinations of needs
there is one constant: in each individual case it is extremely hard to
say
with assurance which support organisation will be catering for a
persons needs. "It is a matter of where you live," says Gill Levy,
development officer at the RNIB's multiple disabilities service. "There
is a game of pass the parcel between agencies when people have
multiple disabilities."

The diversity of solutions matches the large number of causes for
multiple disabilities which include visual impairment.

The main culprit is the same as that for visual impairment itself, old
age. One of the most common problems found alongside visual
impairment among the elderly is hearing loss, which presents particular
difficulties in terms of access to computers if it affects someone who
would otherwise use a screen reader. Such problems can be overcome
by the use of refreshable Braille displays, but non-Braille users who
use sign language must wait for machines which could translate digital
text into manual signs to progress beyond the research phase. For more
on deafblindness see E-Access Bulletin issue 13, January 2001, section
two.

Other problems which commonly afflict younger visually impaired
people include cerebral palsy, Down's syndrome, multiple sclerosis,
head injuries, diabetes, strokes, sickle cell disease or autism. Each
of
these can give rise to disabilities which may have common elements
but which differ enormously in their degree, meaning that each
person's needs has to be dealt with individually.

The computing and disability charity AbilityNet has compiled various
case studies of multiple disability. Among them is Steve, a cerebral
palsy sufferer with no hand use who communicates using a head
pointer and who recently began to lose sight because of retinal
bleeding. To give him access to a computer he was equipped with an
enlarged and visually enhanced keyboard called BigKeys
(http://www.bigkeys.co.uk) and a customised version of the JAWS
screen reader. JAWS needs 'macros' - customised functions - to be
written to allow it to work with 'sticky keys', a facility which allows
users to perform functions with a sequence of key strokes which
normally require several keys to be pressed at once.

In other cases users may need different adaptations such as the use of
one-handed or chording keyboards; 'IntelliKeys' keyboards on which
big symbols can be overlaid (see http://www.intellitools.com); or a
single switch which will allow someone profoundly disabled to select a
letter from an alphabet read out in sequence.

According to Nuala Davis, manager of AbilityNet's London branch,
there are four key rules to follow when assessing people's needs. These
are to keep the number of access packages to a minimum; to gauge the
level of support available to the person; to keep an open mind; and to
select the best solution for the present, no matter what the future may
have in store for the client.

Ultimately, technology can and should bring enormous benefits to
those with multiple disabilities. "Email to those who are housebound is
a tremendous motivation," says the RNIB's Gill Levy. She adds that
she has often been amazed at the children who can these days recite the
alphabet. "I suspect that with new technologies we will see a whole
new range of people who are literate."

[Section three ends.]


++14: SECTION FOUR: TECHNOLOGY
- 'THIN CLIENTS'.

+RETURN TO THE BAD OLD DAYS?
by Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com .

"In terms of computer accessibility it's like going back ten to 15
years.
Be afraid." Such was the stark message delivered by Andy White,
RNIB technology officer, to delegates at the institute's recent
'Techshare' conference (http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare).

The reason for White's gloom is the rise of 'thin client' computing,
the
system whereby large organisations with computer networks hold
almost all information and software applications on a central server or
servers. The 'thin client' machines on users' desktops are little more
than keyboards and screens, with almost no locally held data, software
or processing power. It represents a move away from the high-
specification desktop computer and back to the 'dumb terminal' days
of mainframe computing. Even office software applications such as
word processors are run on the server, with the output being sent to
the
terminal. The result looks the same to the user, but all the actual
computing is taking place on the remote server.

There are many advantages of this kind of computing: it is easier to
update software since you only need to do so once at the centre;
security against hackers and viruses is far tighter; general
maintenance
is easier; and above all, it is cheaper.

Those that have already adopted the technology in the UK include the
national health service hotline NHS Direct; Barclays Bank; and the
Admiral Insurance Group. Indeed its appeal is so strong that even the
RNIB has said it would implement thin client technology if it were not
for accessibility problems.

These problems are not trivial. The great majority of access technology
software relies on a fully functioning PC with its own hard drive,
central processing unit, application software and operating system and
so will simply not function on a 'thin client' terminal.

"Screen magnifiers have some functionality on thin clients. They can
grab enough information from what is coming from the server for
simple magnification," says White. "However, the more advanced
manipulation features of magnifiers will not function, and as for
screen
readers, which convert data output from programmes rather than the
purely graphical information sent to thin clients, it is a no-go area."

In moving to implement thin client technology, therefore, organisations
have completely overlooked the needs of their visually impaired
employees, White says. In the short term, there is only one solution: a
visually impaired employee needs to keep his or her PC working
alongside but outside the terminal system. "Typically organisations do
have two regimes running, and data can still be got at from outside the
thin client system.

"It can be politically hard to insist on this, and employers may not
even
realise it is possible. But people encountering problems when asking
for a proper PC should ask if an organisation's technical people are
also using dumb terminals? Are they hell - they're going to be sitting
there with their fully functioning PCs."

On the other hand, running two systems is not ideal, he says. "It is a
work-around, and work-arounds will only work around for so long,"
says White. "It is not good for visually impaired people to be working
under a separate regime. Eventually their PCs will become outdated,
for example."

In the longer term, therefore, there is a need to build accessibility
in to
thin client systems, and to this end talks are underway between makers
of access technology and those of terminal technology.

Thin client systems generally use Microsoft Terminal Server software
(http://www.microsoft.com/windows2000/technologies/terminal/defaul
t.asp) at their core, often enhanced with software such as MetaFrame
from Citrix (http://www.citrix.com) which adds features such as
improved load-balancing across a network.

Access technology specialists Dolphin Computer Access has been
involved in discussions with both Microsoft and Citrix to see if they
can work together to allow screenreaders to work. However as well as
the technical problems, there are legal ones of copyright and
commercial secrecy to overcome."

"You can run into a legal brick wall," says Mike Hill, software
director
at Dolphin. "We're waiting on Microsoft. The ball is in their court but
they do seem keen to start testing solutions." Hill says Microsoft
hopes
to be able to announce further developments in time for this March's
major international access technology conference in the US, 'CSUN'
(http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf).

If Microsoft does adjust its server technology to make it more
accessible, the Citrix add-ons should not present any further major
problems. However the commercial relationship between Microsoft
and Citrix is complex and ever-changing, with the two firms oscillating
between partnership and competition. With this in mind Citrix is not
simply waiting for Microsoft to adapt its software, but is committed to
finding its own accessibility solutions by the second half of 2003.

Some progress should be made this year, with the US 'section 508' law
requiring accessibility of all technologies purchased by federal
government agencies likely to be a further incentive for change.

On the other hand, even if server technology is adapted to run screen
readers centrally, technicians admit there could be problems with the
bandwidth needed to send the sound output over the network without
unacceptable time delays.

Until lasting solutions to all these problems are found, however, Andy
White says organisations should think carefully about the implications
of their actions. "Any employer installing thin client technology is
currently effectively making visually impaired employees redundant."

[Section four ends.]


++15: SECTION FIVE: VIEWPOINT
- PRODUCT DESIGN.

+SEEKING OUT THE COMMON GROUND.
by Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.org.uk .

Some years ago I experienced an evening of some frustration in a
Danish hotel because I did not realise that the telephone's numeric
keypad worked like an old fashioned calculator rather than a modern
phone; but a totally blind friend beat that when he checked out of a
Miami hotel to find he had somehow triggered 24 hours of 'premium'
(referring to price but not necessarily content) pornography on his
television with the sound muted!

I think of him every time I go into another hotel room or buy a new
piece of consumer electronics, as I did last week. My new remote
controller for a CD player and tuner comprises one row of three and
nine rows of four identical buttons; it sits next to one for the
television
and another for Sky. It differs radically from those for similar
devices
in my study and office. So far I have learned how to play a disc and
find Radio 3.

Now of course I don't expect` the remote for a TV to be the same as
one for a hi-fi in every respect but in an age where devices
proliferate
and people live ever longer would it not be a good idea to have a few
points of commonality?

It would not, for example, be too much to ask for a standard numeric
keypad similar to that for a telephone with a button left of zero for
multi-digit keying and a button to the right for clear/ouch!/I've made
a
mistake. These 12 keys might be distinguished from the others by
being round, square, oblong, or whatever shape the industry pleases.

We might also reasonably expect a mode or function button to be
clearly identified and always in the same place, top right or left, or
in
some given relationship to the numeric keypad; and the same for the
on/off button.

Next it would be nice to have the directional buttons standardised and
capable of use in different modes so that the cursor right might double
up in audio as 'next track', and the cursor left as 'last track'. We
might
also have standardised buttons for raising and lowering the volume.

Past that, of course, there might be many different sets of buttons for
respective modules; but when a blind person goes into a hotel it is
often difficult to get help to find the room, let alone be given a
lesson
on the remote controller (always supposing the porter is button-
literate).

When we got the hi-fi home my wife discovered to her considerable
satisfaction that the tuner display shows RDS (radio data system, the
service which allows basic data such as a station's name to be
displayed). At which point I asked myself a further question: why can't
remote controllers or screen devices have primitive voice output?

The answer is, no reason at all other than a tiny price differential.
The
adaptability, after all, might be built into the remote rather than the
main unit. Customers could then be offered a choice of remotes. What
about one with big, vivid buttons for the blind and/or flamboyant?
What kind of market research is it that shows that as our waists and
bums are getting bigger by the decade our fingers are getting smaller?
It makes you wonder what market research is for.

As long as all manufacturers are indifferent to the market we will all
suffer. But it only takes one to start to turn the tide, and that one
should
not have to be a niche player in the visual impairment world. We don't
drop money into tins to teach global corporations the essentials of
product design.

[Section five ends.]


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337

[Issue ends.]

