+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 39, MARCH 2003.

Technology news for people with visual impairment
(http://www.e-accessibility.com).

Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk)
and National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard. For example, all items are numbered. For details see:
http://www.headstar.com/ten


++ISSUE 39 CONTENTS.

- Section one: News.

01: Planned EU directive to ban technology discrimination
   - draft proposal could be law by year end.

02:  Education support database goes live
- universities and colleges assistance guide.

03: Call for UN action on technology access
- guidelines for development work.

04: Audio e-greetings from Bafta-nominated site
- online messages with poems.

News in brief: 05: Mobile organiser - wireless technology launched; 06:
Digitally undivided - inclusion
awards; 07: Sky description - schedules online.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Visual definition - terminology issue; 09: Bounce back - job-search
web site; 10: Black rectangle -
cursor query; 11: Living paintings - art site invites reponses.

Section three: Conference preview - CSUN 2003
- 12: Mobile highlights for technology showcase: Derek Parkinson looks
at some of the new technologies on
offer at the world's largest annual accessible technology showcase.

Section four: The Arts
- 13: Paintings that speak volumes: Provisions are improving for
visually impaired visitors to museums and
galleries. Mel Poluck looks at new developments in the area.

Section five: Banking - Talking cash machines
- 14: Financial independence: Banks in Australia are among the first in
the world to provide 'talking' ATM
cash machines. Julia Schofield tries one out.

[Contents ends.]


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: PLANNED EU DIRECTIVE TO BAN TECHNOLOGY DISCRIMINATION.

Proposed EU rules banning discrimination against disabled users of
media, telecommunication and online
services have been unveiled this month by European disability groups,
which hope the provisions will pass
into law by the end of this year.

The draft directive would require all private and public bodies to
deliver their internet services in accessible
formats, and all telecommunications services to be made accessible
within five years.

The measures form part of a broad anti-discrimination initiative
developed by the umbrella lobby group the
European Disability Forum (EDF -
http://www.edf-feph.org/en/welcome.htm) with the European Parliament
Disability Intergroup (http://www.edf-feph.org/apdg/index-en.htm), an
informal grouping of MEPs working
on disability policy.

If passed, the rules would represent the first European move to
prohibit discrimination against the disabled
across multiple sectors and services including the workplace,
healthcare, social services, education, goods,
facilities, services and product design. At present, most
anti-discrimination law in EU member states is
contained in provisions which form part of broader laws governing areas
such as transport, education or
social security.

The law would also introduce enforcement procedures, including the
right for people with disabilities to go
to court in any EU member state.

"We expect changes will be made to the draft in the next stage, where
it is considered by the European
Commission directorate concerned with employment and social affairs.
But the draft has been two years in
the making and we have been very careful not to exceed the powers of
European institutions. We hope the
commission will give its support," an EDF spokesperson said this week.


+02: EDUCATION SUPPORT DATABASE GOES LIVE.

Students with disabilities can check what kinds of accessibility and
support facilities and services are
provided for them by colleges and universities in 17 European countries
with the Higher Education
Accessibility Guide (HEAG - http://www.heagnet.org), a European
Commission-funded service that
launched earlier this month.

HEAG users can access online information resources on each country or
find telephone contacts for
educational and government bodies. In the UK section, users can search
for all colleges and universities that
provide syllabuses or books in alternative formats such as Braille,
large print, tape or disk.

Most institutions have provided links to their web sites together with
contact information for disability
advisers. "The idea is to provide people with a general idea of what is
available," said a spokesperson for the
education and employment charity Skill (http://www.skill.org.uk), the
UK partner in the HEAG project.
According to Skill, a student needing information about a specific
course should contact university disability
advisers directly.


+03: CALL FOR UN ACTION ON TECHNOLOGY ACCESS.

An urgent call for the United Nations to build basic technology
accessibility rules into their development
programmes was launched last week at an international meeting in the
Philippines, attended by
representatives of ten Asian countries, the US and Canada.

The event, 'empowering persons with disabilities through ICT'
(http://www.worldenable.net/manila2003),
was organised by 'WorldEnable' (http://www.worldenable.net), an
international accessibility consortium
developed by Canadian company Vision Office
(http://www.visionoffice.com) and US social sector
consultancy AIMS (http://www.intlmgt.com). It was supported by the
Philippine government and the United
Nations department of social and economic affairs.

The problems of access to technology in the developing world are
particularly acute because of lack of funds
and training, so people with disabilities faced even more severe
problems unless action is taken, the
conference heard. A joint statement from delegates called on the UN to
undertake a global study on norms
and standards for technology accessibility in the developing world;
develop a pilot web site accessibility
assessment tool for use in a development context; and develop relevant
training and resource materials
usable by poorer nations.

Cynthia Waddell, director of the US-based centre for disability
resources on the internet
(http://www.icdri.org) and co-facilitator of the conference, said: "The
call from Manila is for a minimum
threshold worldwide for accessible design of all technologies in
general, and of web technology in
particular."

Waddell said the remit of an existing UN committee on rights of people
with disabilities
(http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/disA56168e1.htm), which is working
towards a global convention,
could be expanded to specifically mention accessible design of
technology.


+04: AUDIBLE E-GREETINGS FROM BAFTA-NOMINATED SITE.

A set of audible 'e-greetings cards' accessible to visually impaired
people (http://www.yrguk.com/poetry)
has been launched by the UK Audio Network, a free resource created by
accessibility enthusiast Bill Teale.

Users can choose from 25 poems grouped by themes such as 'humour' and
'birthday', which are played
using the Real Audio standard and are compatible with major types of
screen reader software. Using number
keys for navigation, audio instructions lead the user through options,
which include sending a personalised
message with a poem.

The UK Audio Network site (http://www.yrguk.com) also provides links to
online radio stations, news,
sports commentary, interactive audio quizzes and games for visually
impaired people. In 2002 the site and
was nominated for a British Academy of Film and Television Arts award
for accessible interactive
entertainment (http://www.bafta.org/interactive), to the astonishment
of Teale, who runs the entire operation
unfunded, from his bedroom in Halifax.


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+05: MOBILE ORGANISER: An innovative mobile phone and personal
organiser with a Braille display
and keyboard, providing text messaging, email, mobile telephony and
note-taking functions, will be
launched by Dutch company Alva (http://www.alva-bv.nl) this month,
E-Access Bulletin has learned. The
project was first unveiled at last year's RNIB Techshare conference:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare/phone_weij.htm


+06: DIGITALLY UNDIVIDED: This year's eWell-Being awards are inviting
nominations by 31 March for
'digital inclusion' technology projects which have helped improve
access to jobs, education, entertainment
and leisure interests for disadvantaged groups. The awards are hosted
by non-profit body SustainIT:
http://www.sustainit.org/ewell-being/2003_info.htm


+07: SKY DESCRIPTION: The digital satellite television broadcaster Sky
has added audio description
programme schedules to its web site. Sky currently exceeds the
government quota of 4 per cent of
programming to be audio described:
http://www1.sky.com/disability/tvguide.htm

[Section one ends.]


++SPECIAL NOTICE: 'ACCESS IT' AND 'COMPUTE IT'
- MONTHLY TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINES FROM RNIB.

'Access IT' provides computer access technology information of
particular interest to blind and partially
sighted people. It features articles both for the novice and
experienced user. 'Compute IT' is designed for the
computer enthusiast/amateur and will bring you the latest information
on hardware and software
developments.

To subscribe to either of these magazines by email, Braille or disk, at
a cost of 49 pence an issue, email
RNIB Customer Services at cservices@rnib.org.uk
or call 0845 702 3153

[Special notice ends.]


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .


+08: VISUAL DEFINITION: Trevor Frost, Adaptive Technology Coordinator
at the Royal Society for the
Blind of South Australia, writes in with a point of terminology. "As
someone with an almost radical
disrespect for political correctness I find it difficult to believe I
am writing on just that topic.

"As a reader of E-Access Bulletin I am constantly confronted with the
term 'visually impaired', a common
enough term worldwide but one seldom used here in Australia where we
refer to people with sight loss as
being 'vision impaired'.

"I believe this came about when some pedant decided that a 'visually
impaired' person meant someone who
is unpleasant to look at. When I have pointed this out to visitors from
the UK it has been the cause of great
mirth but one must concede that it is the vision that is affected not
the looks of the individual.

"As a 'vision impaired' person I am curious for others' comments on
this" [Reponses to
inbox@headstar.com].


+09: BOUNCE BACK: Jackie Wright of technology firm Disability Dynamics
writes in following last
month's 'Inbox' snippet from Chris Gregory about online job search
modules developed by Action for Blind
People.

She says: "I thought readers might be interested to look at an
accessible CV design and job search site
'Bounce Back' (http://www.bounceback.org.uk) we developed last year
with EU funding, which is being
used by the Wheatsheaf Trust Employment Access Centre in Southampton
and a number of local colleges.
We are keen for people to make use of it and wish to develop it
further, so any feedback would be
welcome." Please send feedback to Jackie at:
wright.jackie@btinternet.com .


+10: BLACK RECTANGLE: John Loader of DotSix Brailling Services writes
in for assistance on behalf of
a relative: "My mother-in-law has macular degeneration and can no
longer see the standard cursor on her
computer screen, even at 18 point. I've tried in Windows for a more
prominent cursor to no effect, and
searches on the internet seem only to give animated and fun cursors.
What we want is a big black rectangle.
Any idea where I might be able to download one please?" [Reponses to
inbox@headstar.com].


+11: LIVING PAINTINGS: Camilla Oldland of The Living Paintings Trust,
which provides free tactile
versions of paintings and illustrations for visually impaired people,
is seeking help in a review of the
charity's web site (http://www.livingpaintings.org) .

"We are keen to improve the quality of our web facilities, and are
looking for visually impaired internet
users who might guide us in this development. Our web developers have
put together a brief questionnaire
that should take no more than five minutes to complete - all responses
will be treated in confidence". For a
copy of the questionnaire please email lpt@livingpaintings.org .

[Section two ends].


++SECTION THREE: CONFERENCE PREVIEW
- CSUN 2003.

+12: MOBILE HIGHLIGHTS FOR TECHNOLOGY SHOWCASE
by Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com .

The largest annual global showcase of new technology for people with
disabilities, staged at California State
University (CSUN -  http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf), opens on Monday and
runs for six days.

Topics of interest to the visual impairment community this year include
developments in mobile computing;
educational games; and the latest thinking on technology training.

The conference, which will receive visitors from more than 35
countries, will feature a keynote speech by
technology pioneer Ray Kurzweil, who pioneered reading machines for
visually impaired people (see
http://www.kurzweiltech.com/aboutray.html).

The mobile technology highlights will include the unveiling of new
capabilities for the PAC Mate, a
handheld computer made by Freedom Scientific that combines a JAWS
screenreader, browser, email,
calendar, contacts and document functions (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun1). The company will
demonstrate how to connect PAC Mate - which uses the Microsoft Pocket
PC operating system - to a mobile
phone, printer or home computer using Bluetooth wireless technology. It
will also preview future models.

Pulse Data will demonstrate KeyWeb, an accessible web-browser for the
company's mobile BrailleNote
notetakers and other devices; and KeySync, which enables accessible
mobile access to Microsoft Outlook
email software (see http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun2). The company is
also expected to demonstrate new
multilingual capabilities of these products.

VisuAide, a developer of advanced audio products, will demonstrate
Victor Trekker, which combines GPS
satellite connectivity with audio navigation guides (see
http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun3). The company
will also release a new, lower cost version of its Victor Classic
e-book reader
(http://www.visuaide.com/victorclassic.html). The device retains full
functionality and a rechargeable
battery pack, but the power transformer has moved from inside the
player onto the power cord to reduce its
weight when used with batteries. E-Access Bulletin would like to
correct a statement implying reduced
functionality for this device carried in our last issue.

GW Micro will announce the inclusion of a Macromedia Flash online
animation reader for their leading
Window-Eyes screen-reader, which can also now access multimedia content
in formats used by Real Audio
players (see http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun4).

Meanwhile Freedom Scientific and others will demonstrate how the latest
version of its JAWS for Windows
screenreader can navigate forms, tables and frames on web pages
(see http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun5).

As in previous years, training and education will be a key theme, and
this year a European Commission-
funded project exploring educational online games for children is
likely to stir particular interest. The Tactile
Interactive Multimedia (TIM) project intends to develop and to adapt
computer games, making them
accessible through devices like tactile boards, Braille displays or
speech synthesisers. Children as young as
three will be able to navigate through sound environments to boost
their academic and social or emotional
learning (see http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun6).

Among others, the session will examine 'Reader rabbits', an adaptation
of a mainstream discovery game
designed for very young children; 'MudSplat', where the player defeats
mud throwing monsters by squirting
water at them; 'Tim's journey', an exploration game where the player
solves a mystery by exploring a sound
environment; and 'X-tune', a musical game where the player can sequence
and play with different sound
environments. 'TiM's Magic dictation' is a educational game for
learning reading and writing.

New ways of teaching music will be explored by technology developer
Dancing Dots in a session
showcasing its Speech-Assisted Learning product
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun7). SAL works by
placing a standard page of embossed braille over a flat touch-screen.
When the student presses on a Braille
character, SAL responds with auditory feedback. The system also
incorporates a Braille keyboard, a
synthetic speech engine and an audio file player. After completion of a
set activity, the product can report
the results to a tutor.

Finally, a session led by Harris Rosensweig of the Royal New Zealand
Foundation for the Blind; Steve Tyler
of the RNIB and Shan Sasser of the Iowa Department for the Blind will
assess the viability of forming an
international consortium that will provide professionals from around
the world with a resource for
information and training materials on providing computer training to
blind, visually impaired, or deafblind
individuals (http://fastlink.headstar.com/csun8). The session will
discuss the approaches and materials
currently used by the three organisations.

[Section three ends.]


++SECTION FOUR: FOCUS
- THE ARTS.

+13: PAINTINGS THAT SPEAK VOLUMES
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com .

Many museums and galleries are seeking to enhance access to exhibitions
for visually impaired visitors by
combining tactile experience with use of technologies such as web sites
and audio guides.

The National Gallery web site for example, since January 2003, has
featured an online zooming system
whereby users can enlarge details of paintings such as Van Gogh's
'Sunflowers'
(http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/collection/news/newsitems/zoom.htm).
And recent exhibitions at
Newcastle's Laing Art Gallery have incorporated relief versions of
paintings by artists such as Stanley
Spencer with accompanying audio descriptions, some of which remain as
permanent exhibits.

The problem with many of these services, however, arise from a lack of
detail in visual descriptions issued
through audio channels. One regular gallery visitor with a visual
impairment told E-Access Bulletin that
audio description often comes over as superficial and lacking in
detail. "I would love to have the textures,
perspectives and information about techniques explained to me," she
said. "These are the kinds of details
sighted people absorb unconsciously. I want to be able to feel the
depth of a painting."

To explore such issues further and examine possible solutions, the Arts
Council is funding 'Talking images,'
a project to interview around 300 visually impaired people to discover
and analyse their attitudes towards
museum and gallery visits. Another strand of the 18-month project - run
by RNIB with accessible arts
charity VocalEyes (http://www.vocaleyes.co.uk) - is sending 12 visually
impaired 'auditors' to around 50
cultural institutions to test the accessibility of their audio guides.

Some galleries are already attempting to set the pace for accessible
art. Tate Britain
(http://www.tate.org.uk/britain) provides a service whereby visitors
can feel mock-up canvases of paintings
by artists such as Jackson Pollock and handle sculptures. It also began
last month to offer free audio
description tours in association with VocalEyes using new, lightweight
hand sets. In future, the Tate is
aiming to create an audio description 'bank' online, which rotates
according to changing displays.

The British Museum's Compass project
(http://www.thebritishmuseum.ac.uk/compass), a web site
containing images of and information about 5,000 key artefacts, has
also been made accessible for visually
impaired people. Users can change the text size, style and colour
through browser settings and view a text
only version of the service (see http://fastlink.headstar.com/museum1).
Besides Compass, which last year
won the National Library of the Blind's visionary design award
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/nlbuk1), a
terminal for audio-described literature about the museum's collections
was installed in the museum's
reading room last month.

Compass project manager Matthew Cock told E-Access Bulletin: "People
are realising that to start an
accessible site is not just a question of making a text-only option,
but that accessibility for visually impaired
people should pervade the whole site. Not to do so is like only putting
a wheelchair ramp round the back of a
building."

NOTE: For more coverage of access to art galleries and museums see
E-Access Bulletin, Section Four, Issue
35, November 2002 and story four in the News section of our October
2002 issue.

[Section four ends.]


++SECTION FIVE: BANKING
- TALKING CASH MACHINES.

+14: FINANCIAL INDEPENDENCE
by Julia Schofield  julia.schofield@jsc.co.uk .

Australia, Canada and the US currently lead the world in the
development of talking 'ATMs' (automated
teller machines) at banks, for visually impaired customers (see
E-Access Bulletin, issue 31, July 2002, story
16).

In Australia, two banking groups - National Australia Bank, and Westpac
which incorporates Bank of
Melbourne and Challenge Bank - have been the first to deploy the
systems in selected locations, and earlier
this year I had the chance to assess one of these cash machines in
Melbourne.

The idea is to provide fully independent access to the ATM for people
with poor or no sight. The ATMs
used by Bank of Melbourne are manufactured by NCR and are available for
normal use, with additions to
make them 'talk'. The main external changes are some transparent
Braille labelling and a walkman-type
audio socket beneath a small sliding cover.

Whenever visually impaired customers enquire about the system, they
should be directed to a bank that has a
talking machine. Staff in these branches have been trained in how to
show people with poor or no sight the
machine and are instructed too that they must cover how to find it from
the entrance - the present machines
are inside the bank.

Accessible ATMs must be positioned near a door in a location where
someone can easily find it, for example
by following a wall along a route that does not have furniture or
queues of people in the way.

The first time the talking ATM is used, a member of staff at the bank
will accompany the visually impaired
person to ensure they understand how it works. At this short training
session, they provide a small earpiece
with a hook to attach it to the ear so that both hands are free, but
subsequently it is most convenient for users
to bring their own earpiece. In Melbourne, staff training is provided
by the Royal Victorian Institute for the
Blind.

On the machine itself, slots have been marked in Braille with what they
are (for example "cash", "receipt",
"card"). A jack socket has been placed under a small cover so that the
headphone can be plugged in.

The keyboard has tactile markings - the '5' key is marked with a raised
bump, as with a telephone, and the
'enter' and 'clear' keys have additional markings. And then, of course,
there are the spoken instructions -
the element that makes it a 'talking' machine.

To hear the instructions, the customer plugs in their earpiece.
Instantly the machine introduces how it works
in brief, good quality speech. It invites the customer to put in their
card, describing the orientation - "place
your card in the slot marked 'card' with the raised printing uppermost
and to the left".

The customer is next asked to type their card number on the keypad and
press 'Enter' (they are told this key
is next to the 9 and it has a tactile marker). The 'Clear' button is
also described, in case of error. For
withdrawal of cash, the customer is asked to press 1 for 20 Australian
dollars, 2 for 50 dollars, 3 for 100
dollars and so on. When there is a pause, a message reassures the user
that their transaction is being
processed.

Whether the customer wants a receipt is also confirmed with keystrokes
on the numbers and the customer is
told to remove their card then take the money and receipt. Other
transactions work in a similar way and if a
balance is requested then this is given through the earpiece, which
ensures the information remains secure.

Overall, the machine was very usable. The audio instructions were
carefully worded, and the assistance I
received from staff was efficient, sensitive and extremely clear.
Machines such as this represent a major step
forward in financial independence for visually impaired people.

NOTE: Dr Julia Schofield is Founder and Director of Julia Schofield
Consultants Limited
(http://www.jsc.co.uk).

[Section five ends.]


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337

[Issue ends.]

