+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 41, MAY 2003.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.e-accessibility.com).

Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk)
and National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard. For example, all items are numbered. For details see:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 41 CONTENTS.

01: Denial of access
- flaws found in e-voting trials.

02: School test for remote control support
- system obviates need for site visits.

03: 'A-sites' gateway goes live
- searchable database of accessible web sites.

04: Survey finds patchy access awareness in government
- mixed messages from public services.

News in brief: 05: Exhibiting excellence - museum award; 06:
Techshare 2003 - call for papers; 07: Cultural statement - European
initiative.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: DISCworld - Suffolk smart-cards; 09: Driving test - European
skills licence; 10: Debate catalyst - access theory.

Section three: Interview - Michael Burton.
11: Window onto the world: Jemima Kiss talks to the disability rights
commissioner on a mission to ensure the foundations now being laid in
the world of digital services do not disadvantage people with
disabilities.

Section four: Round-up - international.
12: Access all areas: The past 12 months have seen many
developments worldwide in the field of ensuring technology is
accessible for all. Mel Poluck reports.

[Contents ends.]


+SPONSORED NOTICE: NADO CONFERENCE.

The National Association of Disability Officers (NADO) will be
holding its annual conference at the University of Lincoln on 1-2 July
2003.

The conference will focus on the roles, responsibilities, competencies,
and terms and conditions of employment of people working with
students with disabilities in post-16 education. It will include
presentations and workshops, a suppliers showcase and the conference
dinner, providing an opportunity for networking.

Delegates are encouraged to advise us of their needs, which we will
endeavour to meet. A provisional timetable and booking forms are
available from janepawluk@btopenworld.com or from our website:
http://www.nado.ac.uk .

[Sponsored notice ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: DENIAL OF ACCESS.

Many web services provided by councils for e-voting trials in the May
2003 local elections were difficult to find and confusing to navigate,
while pages providing background information for voters were often
worse, according to research by the RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).
The result was the services were inaccessible to people with vision
impairment, who need simple web site structures to use text-to-speech
or test-to-Braille interfaces.

This year's e-voting pilots, the largest so far, provided technology
for
around 1.5 million voters to cast their votes via the internet,
touch-tone
telephones, text messages, digital TV and kiosks. The government has
set itself a target of offering e-voting nationally by the general
election
after next.

In 2002, RNIB called on the government to include accessibility
testing in the pilot assessment process. "The Office of the Deputy
Prime Minister said it wouldn't be necessary because the issue was
being dealt with. Our results suggest that is not the case," said the
institute. "In future we'll be contacting all councils reminding them
of
their duty to comply with human rights and anti-discrimination law.
We want to see a scheme where all authorities running pilots gather
together the information needs of voters and share best practices."

The RNIB report will feed into an Electoral Commission report
(http://www.electoralcommission.gov.uk) on e-voting to be published
later this year. The report will also include findings from the
Disability
Rights Commission (http://www.drc-gb.org), and the physical
disability charity Scope (http://www.pollsapart.org.uk/survey.asp).

NOTE: This article originally appeared in this month's issue of
VoxPolitics Bulletin, our sister email newsletter on e-democracy. To
subscribe email voxpol-subscribe@voxpolitics.com .


+02: SCHOOL TEST FOR REMOTE CONTROL SUPPORT.

A trial service allowing technical support staff to have remote online
access to computers in schools could drastically cut the time that
people with disabilities spend sorting out technology problems,
according to the charity Abilitynet (http://www.abilitynet.org.uk), a
partner in the project.

The service, which is being offered to school pupils with disabilities
under the government-funded Communication Aids Project (CAP -
http://cap.becta.org.uk), enables PC users to contact support staff
through a web site. If the problem can't be resolved by email or over
the phone, users have the option of granting support staff full remote
access to their machine, allowing them to view and alter files and
systems without a site visit.

"This is still at a very early stage, but we expect to provide this
service
to 200 users or so over the next few months," said Abilitynet
operations director David Bains. According to Bains, the service could
be valuable to the wider community of people with disabilities who
rely on PCs. "There is a big gap between the help you can get on the
phone and a site visit - this could help fill that gap", he said.

The service works over a standard 56K modem and requires no special
equipment to be installed on the PC. The user can direct staff not to
access files or applications containing confidential material and
terminate the connection at any time. If the problem cannot be
resolved, the PC is returned to its original set-up. "This is very
useful
for visually impaired people using a computer for the first time, for
example if they're having problems with their printer or audio set-up,"
Bains says.


+03: 'A-SITES' GATEWAY GOES LIVE.

'A-Sites' (http://www.a-sites.org), a long-awaited web service
providing a searchable database of accessible web sites, has been
launched by the National Library for the Blind (NLB - http://www.nlb-
online.org).

The service currently lists 750 sites, according to the NLB, which
began building it in summer last year (see E-Access Bulletin issue 31,
July 2002). An original planned launch date of October 2002 was
postponed to make way for a redesign of the library's main web site.

The delayed launch forms part of the NLB's contribution to a central
government campaign to encourage individuals and social groups who
are not yet making use of the internet to come online, 'Get Started'
(http://www.ukonline.gov.uk/getstarted). The library's other role has
been arranging internet access taster sessions in libraries around the
country (see http://fastlink.headstar.com/nlbuk2).


+04:  SURVEY FINDS PATCHY ACCESS AWARENESS IN
GOVERNMENT.

A new survey has revealed that only around half of those working to
create online government services (55 per cent) say they are "very
aware" of issues surrounding ways of making services accessible to
people with disabilities.

A further 36 per cent of survey respondents said they had heard about
the topic of accessibility, although they lacked strong awareness of
the
issues; and 9 per cent "have little or no awareness of the issues."

The survey was published last week in 'E-Government Outlook 2003-
2004,' the first comprehensive report on the state of e-government
services in the UK from E-Access Bulletin publisher Headstar. An
accessible version of the report is to be made available shortly - for
further details please email:
access-outlook@headstar.com .


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+05: EXHIBITING EXCELLENCE: The National Maritime Museum
(http://www.nmm.ac.uk) this week became the first ever winner of the
UK Museums Computer Group's Jodi Mattes award for web
accessibility:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/mcg2 .

+06: TECHSHARE 2003: The RNIB's annual 'Techshare' access
technology conference is seeking submissions from potential speakers,
who will be rewarded with a discount on their attendance fee. The
closing date for submissions is 31 July 2003:
http://www.techshare.org.uk .

+07: CULTURAL STATEMENT: A pressure group which aims to
establish the right of access to the cultural life of Europe for people
with disabilities, 'EUCREA International', has launched a campaign to
drum up support for its aims:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/eucrea .

[Section one ends.]


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+08: DISCWORLD: Geoff Doggett, project officer at Mid Suffolk
District Council, writes in to canvass reader views on 'Suffolk DISC',
a planned initiative to deliver concessionary smart cards for people on
benefits and with registered disabilities in the county.

Typical providers providing discounted services would be libraries (for
charged-for services such as CD or cassette loans); leisure centres;
bus
operators; and retailers. The card will also act as a single source
proof
of identity when claiming housing or council tax benefits, preventing
the need for repeated proof of eligibility to multiple departments and
organisations.

"I'd like to know, and understand, the issues of use of smart cards by
people with a vision impairment, especially the physical
characteristics
of the card by way of the surface graphics and the possibility of
adding
a simple Braille ID label," Doggett says. "Also, are there issues
surrounding use of photos on such cards? I would be very grateful for
any advice." [Responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


 +09: DRIVING TEST: Thomas Connole from the Republic of Ireland
writes in with a response to our news story last month about the
accessibility or otherwise of the European Computer Driving Licence
computer literacy test.

"I am doing the European Computer Driving Licence training course
and the only problem I found was that PowerPoint was a little
bit inaccessible to me as I had to have assistance to use the mouse",
he
said. [Further experiences please to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: DEBATE CATALYST: Jorge Fernandes of the Portuguese vision
impairment research and support body GESTA, who is also the
translator for our Portuguese language version, writes in to see if he
can generate a debate on some interesting theories published recently
by the web usability expert Jakob Nielsen.

In the April issue of his 'AlertBox' newsletter, Jorge says, Nielsen
wrote an article entitled 'Alternative interfaces for accessibility'
(http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20030407.html). The piece advanced
two main ideas: first, that "The key difference between user interfaces
for sighted users and blind users is not that between graphics and
text;
it's the difference between 2-D and 1-D [two-dimensional and one-
dimensional information structures]," and second, that "The biggest
potential gains [for blind and partially sighted readers] reside in
creating a special design optimised for auditory presentation."

Jorge is interested to know what E-Access Bulletin readers agree with
this assessment,
And if so, what role remains for Braille? [Responses please to
inbox@headstar.com].

[Section two ends].


++SECTION THREE: INTERVIEW
- MICHAEL BURTON.

+11: WINDOW ONTO THE WORLD
by Jemima Kiss  jemimakiss@hotmail.com .

The UK's Disability Rights Commission (DRC -
http://www.drc.org.uk), in partnership with the Centre for Human
Computer Interaction Design at City University London (http://www-
hcid.soi.city.ac.uk), announced last month it is to survey a thousand
websites to identify barriers to accessibility and develop solutions
(see
E-Access Bulletin, April 2003).

The DRC was established by the government in 2000 to promote
equality of opportunity for disabled people through research and a
network of support services. Although the commission has been
operating for three years, however, the new investigation will be the
first web accessibility work it has carried out.

Michael Burton, the commissioner leading the project, defends its
timing by saying it is all a question of priorities. "Important though
I
think this issue is, there are many more urgent issues facing disabled
people and, quite properly, most of our energies are devoted to these."

However, Burton says the DRC does recognise the internet will
become an increasingly crucial communications tool for people with
disabilities. "The internet is tolerant of impairment because content
can
be translated into a form to suit the user," he says. "The web is a
window onto the world, with the potential to liberate disabled people
and enrich their lives in a variety of ways."

The UK disability and computing charity AbilityNet
(http://www.abilitynet.org.uk) estimates that 90 per cent of websites
currently pose access problems for disabled users, despite the
introduction in 1995 of the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) which
makes it unlawful for employers, businesses and organisations to
discriminate against disabled people.

Since 1999, the act has required that organisations must "consider
making reasonable adjustments" to the delivery of their services to
allow access by people with disabilities, although it does not
prescribe
specific standards of web accessibility. The DRC could play a part in
any eventual testing of the DDA's applicability to web accessibility,
by
supporting complainants in its role as a backer of key legal test cases
relating to disability.

Overall however, the purpose of the project is simply to establish the
current state of the art and identify what general measures need to be
taken to improve accessibility. "Previous smaller scale studies suggest
that nearly all sites will have potential for improvement and that many
will have serious shortcomings," Burton says.

"The DRC is in the business of instigating systematic change in the
environment, rather than setting specific standards - so the impact of
these findings will not be fast," he says. But I would like to think
that if
we carried out the same report in three years' time, there would be a
significant improvement," he said.

One problem with this idea is that the commission itself may not be
around in three years' time. In August 2002 the UK government began
a consultation process to establish whether a Single Equality
Commission (SEC) might better implement tighter new EU rules on
combating discrimination of all kinds. However, despite media
speculation that such a move might mean the end of the DRC, Burton
is confident that the future of the organisation is not in doubt.

"We feel strongly that disability issues have very specific concerns
and
these need to be represented by a specialist organisation. Whatever the
new umbrella structure of an SEC, we have made it clear that we must
continue to do this."

Burton was selected to oversee the web accessibility project because of
his experience as a former chief executive of LIMNET, an interactive
digital network allowing brokers and underwriters to process insurance
contracts. He says that for most businesses, the problem of tackling
web accessibility is likely to be administrative rather than technical.
"I
don't want to prejudge the findings of our research, but I suspect that
we'll need to ensure that what may be seen as a peripheral issue is
given due attention at every stage in the specification, development
and
maintenance of websites."

For the tests themselves, some key web sites will be pre-selected,
although most will be chosen randomly from both the private and
public sectors. The survey will use standard accessibility testing
software alongside physical testing by people with a variety of
impairments, to establish the correlation between technical compliance
and practical usability. The aim is to systematically evaluate sites
from
across England, Scotland and Wales that will be representative of those
typically used by disabled people - including both the private and
public sectors.

The work is expected to be completed at the end of 2003, and Burton
believes the results will be hugely influential in helping to empower
disabled people as virtual citizens.

"It will be years before the full potential of the web is realised but
I am
delighted to have the opportunity to ensure that the foundations being
laid now do not disadvantage disabled people, as those laid in the
physical world too often do."

[Section three ends].


++SECTION FOUR: ROUND-UP
- INTERNATIONAL.

+12: ACCESS ALL AREAS.
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com

Over the past 12 months there have been many significant
developments in Europe and across the world to boost access to digital
technologies for all.

The European Commission has dubbed 2003 the European Year of
People with Disabilities, with the aim of encouraging action, new
initiatives and alliances within member states to prevent
discrimination. In March, measures forming part of a wider European
anti-discrimination initiative were proposed by the lobby group the
European Disability Forum (EDF - http://www.edf-feph.org) together
with the European Parliament Disability Intergroup
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/apdg1), a grouping of MEPs working on
disability policy.

The two bodies unveiled a set of proposals that aimed to ban
discrimination against disabled users of media, telecommunications
and online services. The draft required all public bodies to deliver
internet services in accessible formats, asking for all
telecommunications services to be made accessible within five years. If
all proceeds according to plan, the measures could be passed into
European law by the end of 2003.

In Ireland, new accessibility guidelines for digital technologies were
published in July 2002 by the Irish National Disability Authority
(NDA), the independent statutory body that oversees the country's
disability policy. The guidelines, which were based on consultation
with both service users and providers, used a broad-brush approach to
cover electronic services such as web sites; public access terminals;
telecoms terminals and application software aimed at procurement
managers and technology developers (http://www.accessit.nda.ie). The
authority said the guidelines, and associated innovative web-based
tools to help bodies comply, represented "a new practical dimension to
Irish national and European laws on accessibility".

The US has been a legislative pacesetter with the enactment of section
508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (amended in 1998)
(http://www.section508.gov) which requires that all new technology
systems designed or commissioned by federal agencies must be
accessible to people with disabilities. The law also covers federally
funded programs and services, but not web pages of private industry.
An independent Access Board created by the law regulates
accessibility and develops technologies providing technical assistance
and training on the guidelines and standards of section 508.

Early in 2003, however, US publication Government Computer News
reported that US government initiatives were making slow progress
implementing section 508 regulations. Many departments are reported
to only be adapting their services a year beyond the deadline for
compliance (see http://fastlink.headstar.com/gcn).

In lower-income countries, heightened problems exist for people with
disabilities due to a general lack of funds for technology and
training.
Special access technologies, which often require extra investment, are
rarely available, so people with disabilities find themselves doubly
disadvantaged.

Moves to tackle this problem by raising awareness in the development
community were launched in March 2003 at a meeting held in the
Philippines, attended by representatives of ten Asian countries, the US
and Canada (see http://www.worldenable.net/manila2003).

Delegates issued an urgent call to the United Nations to build basic
technology accessibility rules into all its development programmes.
The countries also called for the undertaking of a global study on
norms and standards for technology accessibility in the developing
world.

The event, 'empowering persons with disabilities through ICT',
suggested a pilot 'web site accessibility assessment tool' and training
materials should be developed which are specifically tailored to the
needs of people living in poorer nations. It remains to be seen whether
the UN, in these busy times for world diplomacy, will take action in
this vital area later in the year.

NOTE: This article is extracted from 'E-Government Outlook 2003-
2004,' the first comprehensive report on the state of e-government
services in the UK from E-Access Bulletin publisher Headstar. An
accessible version of the report is to be made available shortly - for
further details please email:
access-outlook@headstar.com and for information about paper copies
email outlook@headstar.com .

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
News editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337

[Issue ends.]

