+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 47, NOVEMBER 2003.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription
details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 47 CONTENTS.

01: Award for TV voice control experiment
- 'virtual human interface' accepts spoken commands.

02: Guide to work experience placements
- insights into problems faced by students with disabilities.

03: Sentient access to e-learning resources
- web-based product scans university libraries.

04: Speech technology market set to explode
- analysts predict 'leap forward'.

News in brief: 05: Daisy, Daisy - two new e-book readers; 06:
Educational guide - RNIB catalogue; 07: Lieberman pledge - assistive
technology funding.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Interest group - procurement community; 09: Caught out? - design
site inaccessible; 10: Flat facts - monitors and magnification.

Section three: Technology - Global Positioning System
11: Eyes in the sky:

Section four: Interview - Fayyaz Afzal.
12: Court life - Phil Cain talks to one of the UK's few registered
blind barristers who touch-types as he cross-examines witnesses and
has no problems with bloodstained evidence.

[Contents ends].

++SPECIAL NOTICE: TECHSHARE: LEARNING, WORK AND
LIFE

This year's major UK conference on technologies for the vision-
impaired, Techshare, will focus on the themes of learning, work and
life. The event, hosted by the RNIB and sponsored this year by
Microsoft, will cover the internet; e-learning; and making music.
There
will be a pre-conference workshop 'Techshare for teachers' sponsored
by government agency for technology in education, Becta.

The results of a survey of blind and partially sighted people in the
UK on their current use of, and attitudes towards technology will be
presented to delegates. Techshare is held on 20-21 November 2003 at
Jury's Inn, Birmingham and costs 180 pounds per person or 120
pounds for one day. To register visit:
http://www.techshare.org.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: AWARD FOR TV VOICE CONTROL EXPERIMENT.

An experimental system allowing people to access digital television
sets using voice commands has won a Royal Television Society award
for technical innovation (http://fastlink.headstar.com/rts1).

The Virtual Human Interface for a Set-Top box Agent (VISTA -
http://www.vista-epg.org.uk) interacts with the viewer through voice
commands rather than the handset with onscreen menu format that
makes current digital TV electronic programme guides (EPGs) difficult
to use for many people with disabilities.

With VISTA, a virtual person appears and speaks directly to the
viewer, asking questions and responding to voice commands for
services. Unlike many interactive voice response systems, VISTA is
also designed to respond to a broad range of pronunciation. "As part
of the project we used testers with a range of accents. One person was
Glaswegian for example," said project manager Dr Jonathan Freeman.
According to Freeman, the VISTA technology is designed to be
compatible with set-top boxes which are already widely-used such as
those issued with the Freeview and BskyB broadcast services.

It is unclear if the VISTA project team, which included the
Independent Television Commision, BSkyB and City University, will
develop the project further. "It has to be emphasised that the aim
was to demonstrate the concept, not develop a product," said Freeman.
However, Ofcom (http://www.ofcom.gov.uk), the new regulator of
digital communications, is scheduled to launch a public consultation
on access to EPGs later this month.


+02: GUIDE TO WORK EXPERIENCE PLACEMENTS.

Advice on work experience placements for students with disabilities,
including those with impaired vision, is offered in a new free guide
from Skill (http://www.skill.org.uk), the national organisation for
students with disabilities.

'Into work experience' (http://www.skill.org.uk/shared/into_we.asp)
includes practical advice about finding and starting a placement;
disabled people's legal rights; a reference section listing helpful
publications and organisations; a section for employers highlighting
the benefits of taking on disabled people; and contributions from
students about their varied experiences of work placements.

According to Jenny Hayden, a blind former student at the University
of North London who supplied one of the case studies, a work placement
may be difficult at first but can pay off in the longer term. "It was
really hard going into an unfamiliar environment, to do a new job
with
people I didn't know," she told E-Access Bulletin. "But it's a good
way
of finding out the difficult things with a safety net," she said. "I
now feel quite happy about looking for any kind of job."

A particular difficulty was gaining access to company IT systems
during her work placement, Hayden said. "I use a Braille 'n Speak
notetaker but the IT department wouldn't let me load any equipment
onto their computers. So the office manager transferred data onto a
disk, and onto my notetaker," she said.

The guide is available in large print, tape, disk or Braille format.
To order a copy contact Sue Beckford on sue@skill.org.uk .


+03: SENTIENT ACCESS TO E-LEARNING RESOURCES.

E-learning could become easier for vision-impaired lecturers and
students with the launch of an accessible version of a web-based
product that can search digital content held in university libraries.

According to developer Sentient Learning
(http://www.sentientlearning.com), its upgraded Sentient Discover
software is the first of its kind to receive a 'triple A' rating when
tested
against the international Web Accessibility Initiative standards
(http://www.w3.org/WAI).

Sentient Discover sits between online learning environments, such as
WebCT and Blackboard, and resources such as library and online
journal catalogues. It enables academics and course designers to
search
a university's entire bank of resources and to construct online
resource
lists for their courses. Students can use the lists to discover if a
library
book is out on loan for example, or to link directly to an online
journal article.

However, although Sentient Discover is designed to be accessible,
colleges and universities will also need to ensure that the
information
retrieved by the software is also presented in accessible formats.

At present, Sentient Discover is used by the universities of Leeds,
Edinburgh and Middlesex, and the London School of Economics.
Users of earlier versions may upgrade to the accessible version free
of charge.


+04: SPEECH TECHNOLOGY MARKET SET TO EXPLODE.

The worldwide market for speech technology products is set to leap
forward over the next 18 to 24 months, according to one leading US
analyst.

Donna Fluss, a principal at DMG Consulting
(http://www.dmgconsult.com), says a number of changes signal that
the market is set to take off. "In the last five years, the accuracy
of speech applications has reached more than 95 per cent," says Fluss.
"That is a crucial threshold in terms of it gaining wider
acceptance."

The cost of speech hardware has also dropped significantly, Fluss
says.
Vendors such as Intel have been cutting the cost of voice boards
continually, while infrastructure vendors such as IBM, HP, Oracle and
Intel are taking this market more seriously than ever before.

One reason for this increased activity may be the entrance of
Microsoft
into the market, she says. "Microsoft's involvement will move speech
to the forefront and raise awareness. It will also force the hand of
the other vendors to invest more widely."

Technology analysts Gartner (http://www.gartner.com) are also
predicting strong growth in the sector. Their latest reports say the
global speech software license market will grow from 127.5 million
dollars in 2002 to more than 258 million dollars in 2007.

NOTE: This article is based on a piece by Donna Fluss for the
'CRMXchange' site
(http://www.crmxchange.com/speech_technology/oct03.html).


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+05: DAISY DAISY: Two new e-book readers conforming to the
DAISY standard (http://www.daisy.org) are due on the market by the
end of this month. EaseReader software costs 30 pounds from Dolphin
audio publishing
(http://www.dolphinse.com/products/easereader.htm). And the CD
walkman-shaped Scholar Daisy Player from Telex, priced 195 pounds,
is aimed at younger users and is the smallest player yet:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/scholar1 .

+06: EDUCATIONAL GUIDE: The RNIB's new Learning Catalogue,
its guide to products, services and publications for vision-impaired
learners of all ages, was published last week. Products covered
include
educational software and hardware. To view the catalogue or order a
copy in various formats visit:
http://onlineshop.rnib.org.uk/learning .

+07: LIEBERMAN PLEDGE: US Democratic presidential runner Joe
Lieberman has pledged dedication to support renewed funding for the
Assistive Technology Act, which offers federal government funding for
projects to develop and provide technology for people with
disabilities.
According to the candidate, President Bush's 2004 budget proposal is
threatening these projects:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/lieb1 .

[Section one ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: WEB ACCESSIBILITY FORUM.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new
accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so do come along
and join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.

- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+08: INTEREST GROUP: Ruth Loebl, Senior technology
development officer with the RNIB's Technology in Learning and
Employment division, writes in with a warning against a tendency to
define the term 'accessibility' too narrowly.

"Is there some creeping influence at work, whereby the word
'accessibility' is starting to mean 'web accessibility', leaving
other
technologies and issues out in the cold? In your October issue there
was a notice which said: "Accessify Forum is a web-based discussion
forum devoted to all topics relating to accessibility." It isn't,
it's devoted to all topics relating to web accessibility.

"Similarly, the European Accessibility Consortium (section four,
October issue) hasn't called itself the European Web Accessibility
Consortium, despite the fact that that's what it is.

"There are many other types of accessibility - access to software, to
fax machines and photocopiers, access to information, to kiosks and
cashpoints, to telephone systems, to buildings and to services. My
team
has been looking in particular at the accessibility of IT systems on
desktop PC interfaces, and the need to address accessibility at the
very
start of the procurement process rather than trying to add on access
technology at some late stage.

"We are drawing together a group of organisations that share this
view
into an online community, the Accessible IT Procurement Framework
Interest Group (IT-include). This is now available for public
subscription at
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/IT-include and readers of E-Access
Bulletin are invited to join."


+09: CAUGHT OUT? Craig Massey, principal webmaster at Barnsley
Metropolitan Borough Council, writes: "I read your article titled
'Web
design body embraces accessibility' [on the British Web Design and
Marketing Association accessibility working group - see E-Access
Bulletin, issue 46, October 2003] and will follow the work of this
organisation. As the webmaster for Barnsley
(http://www.barnsley.gov.uk) I have an obvious interest in usability
and accessibility.

"I was concerned to note though, that the home page of the digital
design company Nomensa (http://www.nomensa.com), whose
accessibility consultant LTonie Watson is acting chair for the
working
group, itself fails the basic level 'A' test using the online
accessibility
testing tool WebXact (http://webxact.watchfire.com). I haven't
checked
the rest of the site but it seems that everyone finds it hard to get
it right all the time."


+10: FLAT FACTS: Finally, our tireless correspondent Chris
McMillan has some advice for Steve Richard, who wrote in last month
to ask about compatibility of the Zoomtext screen magnifier with TFT
flat-screen monitors. She writes: "While not a Zoomtext user
(circumstances dictated otherwise), Lunar works perfectly on my TFT
monitor. I've had the iiyama AS 4611 UT 18-inch screen a couple of
years now.

"So far as I know Zoomtext works as well as Lunar on TFT. I have
Lunar magnification for reading text and emails but I can 'disable'
it and use 'OneFormat' by Dalgit Singh for reading the web. OneFormat
(http://www.oneformat.com) is a free, simple to use web browsing
system which you can set to your personal preferences."

[Section two ends].


++ SECTION THREE: TECHNOLOGY
- GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM.

+12: EYES IN THE SKY
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com .

The ability to know exactly where you are at any particular time by
using signals sent from satellites is of clear use to people sailing
boats
or driving cars. But it is also of enormous value to people who are
blind, potentially allowing far greater independence of movement.

Currently, the main working technology in this field is the Global
Positioning System (GPS), which uses a network of 24 satellites in
geostationary orbits 11,000 miles high positioned so that at least
three
are visible from any point on the Earth.

GPS receivers use triangulation of radio signals sent by these
satellites
to work out the position of a person or object to within 10 metres or
so.
The system is owned, operated and licensed for civilian use by the US
military, which itself uses an enhanced service with an accuracy of
one centimetre or less.

The main player in the application of GPS technology to location
finders for blind people is Canadian firm VisuAide, with its Victor
Trekker device (http://www.visuaide.com/gpssol.html), which came on
to the UK market in June this year with assistance from the RNIB.
"People are exploring their locale like they've never been able to do
in the past," says Mervyn Robertson, technical director of Sight and
Sound Technology (http://www.sightandsound.co.uk) which distributes
the Trekker. It currently costs 1,125 UK pounds, although the price
will come down, he says.

A Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) with a GPS receiver attached to a
harness, the device is hooked up to an electronic voice-box that
provides location data to the user using electronic maps developed by
Navigation Technologies (http://www.navtech.com).

The Trekker allows users to add to existing information by recording
"points of interest" such as "I'm home now" or "I'm at the bank"
which can be recorded and played back on familiar routes. Where the
information is available, Robertson says, pub and restaurant names
are programmed into maps.

"You can say "where am I?" and it'll say "23 South Street", but it
doesn't allow you to pre-plan a route," says Robertson. However, this
looks set to change this February, when the Trekker will provide a
free
upgrade to all users, making route-planning available for the first
time.

One potential pitfall of GPS is loss of signal. If a satellite is out
of range or if users are situated in built-up areas for example,
navigation
temporarily disappears. "In a narrow street or alley, if you don't
have
the satellite to view, you could potentially be in a bit of trouble,"
Robertson says.

Dr John Gill, chief scientist at the RNIB, says that for GPS
technology
to work well, navigational data needs to include temporary as well as
permanent outdoor features and information such as which side of the
Town Hall the front entrance is located, or whether there are
roadworks.

Dr Gill says the most promising development in this field is being
developed by a team at Brunel University headed by Professor Bala
Balachandran. The team is developing a system which uses existing
mobile phone technology linked to a control centre staffed by human
operators.

"A blind person will never totally rely on technology," Balachandran
says. "They like a friendly voice at the other end. If the blind
person
wants to go from A to B, they press a button and an operator knows
exactly the location of the blind person." The operator sees a
digital
map with the whereabouts of the user and verbally guides them.

The beauty of the Brunel system is that users don't have to have
guidance all the time and the navigated area doesn't have to be
familiar
territory, he says. The opportunity for two-way conversation also
makes it a potentially useful tool for people with intellectual as
well as
visual impairments.

To avoid signal loss inside buildings or underground, the Brunel team
have also devised a wearable TV camera to allow the operator to
continue guiding. The system also has the potential to allow
relatives
or friends to navigate the vision-impaired user.

The Brunel project already has the support of mobile phone company
02 and the mapping agency Ordnance Survey, but is currently seeking
further funding to develop the product for market. When ready the
device should cost no more than a high specification mobile phone,
Balachandran says.

One final concern remains. Because GPS is US military-owned, in
times of war or crisis the system could theoretically be cut off or
restricted. "You're at the beck and call of the American military,"
Robertson says. This could soon change with the launch of GALILEO,
a complementary European navigation system due to launch its first
satellite next year (http://fastlink.headstar.com/galileo1). The
future for
Europe could be pinpoint accurate.

[Section three ends].


++SECTION FOUR: INTERVIEW
- FAYYAZ AFZAL.

+12: COURT LIFE
by Phil Cain  phil@vitalpublishing.com .

"My heart leaps up when I behold a rainbow in the sky - or a murder
in the offing," said Horace Rumpole, the iconic lawyer created by
novelist John Mortimer. But 26-year-old Fayyaz Afzal, one of only
three barristers currently practising in the UK who are registered as
blind, shows little enthusiasm for murder trials.

The reason for this is not his blindness. One might think that an
inability to see would be an insurmountable handicap in a murder
trial,
with the presentation of bloodstained instruments and other pieces of
evidence in plastic bags to examine and hand round. In fact however,
"with exhibits there has always got to be a written statement with
it,
otherwise it is not a piece of evidence," Afzal says.

The real reason for his disinclination to work on such cases is that,
"murders are the most boring cases because they are all to do with
forensic science, with experts spending a whole day telling you how
eminent they are." Afzal's low boredom threshold means that a fast-
moving robbery trial lasting three to four weeks is much more to his
liking.

A love of law films and an urge to help other people led Afzal to his
profession, and since qualifying as a barrister in 1999 he has been
involved in a wide range of cases on immigration, family law, road
traffic and crime, working from Leicester's New Walk chambers
(http://www.newwalkchambers.co.uk). "You don't really have control
of cases that come in, it's a case of supply and demand. Robbery,
burglary, theft, assault, public order - I do anything that comes up
in the magistrate or crown court," he says.

Although he still has a very small amount of sight, closed circuit
television magnifiers can only give him the gist of what is on a
page. "I
still walk around with reams of paper under my arm, but just for
effect," he jokes. But the paper documents are useful to him as well
because he carries a portable scanner and a speech-enabled laptop.
Although he learned Braille at primary school, he doesn't use it a
great
deal. "If I had all the papers I needed in printed out in Braille I
would need a wheelbarrow," he says.

Judges who ask if he can manage soon realise they need not worry, he
says. While in court he makes and refers to notes using his laptop
and an earphone and has the knack of touch-typing while standing to
cross-examine witnesses. When giving a complex closing speech to
summarise his argument he uses a set of around 25 bullet point
prompts spoken through his earphone. "Anyone will tell you that the
best speeches are never written down verbatim," he says.

With a typical workload of five or six hours of preparation for a
court
appearance the following morning, and a wife and three children at
home, learning to surf the internet has had to wait.

"I don't use the internet myself, but I need it all the time," Afzal
says.
It is particularly useful when researching immigration cases when, for
example, someone says they might be stoned to death for committing
adultery if sent back to Iran. To find out how true such a statement
is he sits with one of his assistants as they summarise pages from the
Human Rights Watch or Amnesty International web sites. If it sounds
relevant he will ask them to cut and paste the text into a document
which he can read from his laptop.

With faxes remaining the most common way for legal documents to be
sent, either he or an assistant has to scan them into his machine.
But
email is becoming more popular, and the arrival of fax machines able
to send faxes to email addresses means there is likely to be more in
his inbox and less under his arm in future.

Afzal is also excited about the ease of getting online with his new
laptop which contains a wireless internet card, providing broadband
connections to the internet in wireless "hot spots". His biggest
technology bugbear, he says, is not being able to read text messages.
Instead he uses his Nokia 3310 to send and receive voice messages.

Overall, Afzal finds life around the courts to be more friendly and
less
formal than is often supposed. "It's a very embracing profession.
There
are some very nice people," he says. Of those who succumb to
stereotypical stuffiness, he says: "It is not them, it is the job. If
you don't keep your social life alive then you end up like them."

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as
'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck mel@headstar.com
Correspondent - Phil Cain phil@vitalpublishing.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
