+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 46, OCTOBER 2003.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).

Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard. For details see:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 46 CONTENTS.

01: UK to pioneer location-based services
- satellite positioning to offer users freedom and mobility.

02: Accessible formats copyright law enacted
- new rules will speed up access to books.

03: Web design body embraces accessibility
- new working group to offer practical help.

04: Politicians promote benefits of e-voting
- European Parliament members co-ordinate work.

News in brief: 05: Indigo forum - European project; 06: Mobile guide
- Oftel advice; 07: Brent browsealoud - council's talking web site; 08:
Beyond text - US e-book project.

Section two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' forum.
09: Government standards - RNIB response; 10: Chinese stars -
language tips; 11: Smart response - smart card resources; 12: Flat
screen - magnifier query; 13: Training gap - teachers sought; 14:
Interim management - ACB radio update.

Section three: Interview - Peter Barker OBE
15: Building bridges: Phil Cain talks to a pioneer who combines
personal and professional experience to advance the theory of
accessible building and transport systems.

Section four: Focus - web standards
16: Fighting European fragmentation: a new international consortium
will try to harmonise the plethora of accessibility tools and standards
springing up across Europe. Mel Poluck reports.

[Contents ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: TECHSHARE: LEARNING, WORK AND LIFE

This year's major UK conference on technologies for the vision-
impaired, Techshare, will focus on the themes of learning, work and
life. The event, hosted by the RNIB and sponsored this year by
Microsoft, will cover the internet; e-learning; and making music. There
will be a pre-conference workshop 'Techshare for teachers' sponsored
by government agency for technology in education, Becta.

The results of a survey of blind and partially sighted people in the UK
on their current use of, and attitudes towards technology will be
presented to delegates. Techshare is held on 20-21 November 2003 at
Jury's Inn, Birmingham and costs 180 pounds per person or 120
pounds for one day. To register visit:
http://www.techshare.org.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: UK TO PIONEER LOCATION-BASED SERVICES.

A UK-based research consortium is undertaking a pioneering project to
develop location-based services for people with mobility problems.
The project, called LBS4ALL, will exploit new mobile computing,
global positioning and communication technologies to aid navigation
for older, visually impaired and blind people in urban environments.

The project's partners are the Department of Information Science
(http://www.soi.city.ac.uk/organisation/is/) and the Centre for Human
Computer Interaction (HCI) Design (http://www-hcid.soi.city.ac.uk) at
City University, London; the Age Concern Institute of Gerontology at
Kings College, London (http://fastlink.headstar.com/kings1); the
mapping agency Ordnance Survey (http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk);
and the RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk). It is funded until January 2006
by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) and the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).

Location-based services, which use knowledge about where a person is
located to deliver relevant information to a mobile device, could offer
blind and vision-impaired people far greater independence of
movement. "At the moment blind and visually impaired people have to
plan every journey meticulously and can't really be dropped into a new
environment," says Kevin Carey, honorary research fellow at the
Centre for HCI Design. "A location-based service could allow them to
be more spontaneous in their movements and give them greater
freedom and autonomy."

LBS4ALL has four strategic objectives: to develop applications to
deliver maps, navigation, directions and other information to mobile
devices such as smart phones; to develop a wearable mobility aid using
an earpiece for aural communication; to create maps offering a
"walking eye view" of areas, including localised elements such as
pavements and pillar boxes; and to work with commercial
organisations such as mobile phone companies.

"We see location-based services as complementing the use of canes or
guide dogs among the blind and visually impaired," says Jonathan
Raper, professor of geographic information science at City University.
"Micro navigation - avoiding banging into low branches or stepping
down a manhole - will be covered by existing mobility aids. But by
developing new mobile navigation applications, we hope to give the
blind and visually impaired greater freedom."


+02: ACCESSIBLE FORMATS COPYRIGHT LAW ENACTED.

A law will come into force next week allowing UK schools, libraries
and non-profit organisations to provide accessible versions of printed
materials to vision-impaired people without having to receive
permission from the rights holders.

The law applies to the production of books in accessible formats by
individual vision-impaired people, schools, colleges and non-profit
bodies.

The Copyright (Visually Impaired Persons) Act
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/copy1), which comes into force on 31
October, says if a non-profit or educational organisation has the master

copy of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, it does not
infringe copyright for them to make or supply accessible copies for
"vision impaired persons to whom the master copy is not accessible
because of their impairment".

This means vision-impaired people will receive accessible copies of
books in weeks, not months as is commonplace under current
arrangements for distribution of accessible versions through a handful
of authorised bodies such as the RNIB.

According to Barbara Stratton, copyright adviser at the Chartered
Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP -
http://www.cilip.org.uk), "no-one may derive any profit from making
an accessible copy but a charge may be made to the user".

"It is very positive that [the law] doesn't specify the format, it just
talks about making an accessible format" says RNIB campaigns officer
David Mann. "The only significant limitation is if an equivalent
accessible version exists commercially", he said, since the law only
allows for vision-impaired people to obtain accessible versions of
materials if one does not already exist.


+03: WEB DESIGN BODY EMBRACES ACCESSIBILITY.

The British Web Design and Marketing Association (BWDMA -
http://www.bwdma.com) has formed a new usability and accessibility
working group to combat the exclusion of people with disabilities from
the internet. The group, which will hold its first meeting in London in
early November, has attracted 18 members to date, including
professionals from the blind and deaf communities, academics and
industry professionals.

The association aims to devise practical initiatives to stimulate greater
adoption of usability and accessibility practices in the digital economy.
It wants to simplify these issues for web owners and web developers
who it says are confused by - or oblivious to - current legislation
relating to accessibility.

Part III of the Disability Discrimination Act, which came into effect in
October 1999, stipulates that service providers must make "reasonable"
adjustments to ensure their services are accessible to disabled people.
The association says awareness of the Act is particularly low among
large corporations.

"When you mention usability and accessibility to some companies,
they have visions of text-only web sites which will ruin their corporate
branding," says Leonie Watson, acting chair for the working group and
usability and accessibility consultant for the digital design company
Nomensa (http://www.nomensa.com). "But you don't have to sacrifice
accessibility for creativity. We want to reassure businesses that they
can have all the bells and whistles while making their sites accessible
to a greater number of people."

One of the items on the agenda for November's meeting will be to
discuss the merits of an accreditation scheme for web suppliers with
expertise in usability and accessibility. This would provide a valuable
resource for corporate and government purchasers and give web
developers something to aim for, says Watson.


+04: POLITICIANS PROMOTE BENEFITS OF E-VOTING.

A meeting this week of Members of the European Parliament (MEPs)
and election officials to discuss accessible voting in the 2004 European
Parliament elections could pave the way for a series of co-ordinated
studies to assess the benefits of e-voting for people with disabilities.

The European Parliament Disability Intergroup (EPDI -
http://fastlink.headstar.com/epdi1) met in Strasbourg to discuss past
and present experiments with e-voting, and to lay foundations for
sharing knowledge and good practices in future.

"It seems intuitively likely that e-voting is a positive thing for people
with disabilities, because it enables them to vote independently and in
privacy," said MEP Richard Howitt, president of EPDI. "But we need
more hard evidence to support this," he said.

According to Howitt, the meeting discussed the planned UK e-voting
pilots for the May 2004 elections to the European Parliament, and
heard from representatives of the UK Electoral Commission
(http://www.electoralcommission.org.uk). "The Commission
welcomed the suggestion that it could go back to its unpublished data
and look for evidence, and to take part in evaluations in other EU
countries," he said.

At present there is little political will to mandate e-voting across
Europe, according to Howitt. However, EPDI will continue to promote
best practice in evaluating its impact on people with disabilities.


++NEWS IN BRIEF.

+05: INDIGO FORUM: The European Blind Union (EBU) is calling
for vision-impaired people from across Europe to send in contributions
for a new website, 'Indigo', created to mark the European Year of
People with Disabilities. The European Commission-funded site aims
to promote an exchange of views from 'dreams of a better world' to
experiences of discrimination:
http://www.ebuindigo.org .

+06: MOBILE GUIDE: The telecommunications regulator Oftel -
soon to be incorporated into the communications super-regulator
Ofcom - has launched a guide to encourage mobile phone service
providers to make their products more accessible. The 'Good practice
guide for service delivery for disabled and elderly customers in the
UK' covers the use of larger fonts and adjustable screen contrasts for
mobile phones:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/oftel1 .

+07: BRENT BROWSEALOUD: The London Borough of Brent has
added speech software to its web site for people with vision or reading
impairments. Users can adjust speed, volume and language according
to their needs. The software, 'Browsealoud', is free to download:
http://www.brent.gov.uk .

+08: BEYOND TEXT: The National Center for Accessible Media
(NCAM), based at public broadcaster WGBH in the US, has published
a set of guidelines on talking menus for TV set-top boxes and DVD
players:
http://ncam.wgbh.org/resources/talkingmenus .
Meanwhile, WGBH has been awarded a three-year grant from the US
government for a project, 'Beyond the text', which aims to study ways
to add multimedia - images, audio and video - in to e-books in ways
which are accessible to vision-impaired people:
http://ncam.wgbh.org/ebooks .

[Section one ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: ACCESSIBILITY DISCUSSION FORUM.

Accessify Forum is a web-based discussion forum devoted to all topics
relating to accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and
'Site building and testing' through to projects such as the new
accessibility testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open
source forum software itself.

The forums were launched by Nigel Peck on 6 August and have
already attracted nearly 2,000 contributions. All you need to register
is a working email address, so head over and join in the party at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION TWO: 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.

- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com .

+09: GOVERNMENT STANDARDS: Following last month's news
piece 'Web standards mismatched?' describing the government's
decision to raise council web site standards to a minimum 'AA'
requirement, Vicki Cookson of the RNIB writes in to clarify the
organisation's position.

"We welcome the government's decision to raise the accessibility bar
to AA," she says. "This is the strongest signal yet that it is truly
committed to making the UK's web presence one of the most
accessible in the world.

"Local authority web site managers should be reassured that RNIB
offers an auditing service to AA standard. This has not been widely
publicised until now, as there has been little demand for it beyond the
assessment of individual templates. However, we'll be happy to
renegotiate the terms of any impending audit.

"To set the See it Right audit in context, we're confident that the WAI
checkpoints covered in our standard represent best practice
accessibility in the real world of the web - the standard includes the
checkpoints which we believe are realistic, achievable and have the
highest impact on the accessibility of a website.

"To qualify for the See it Right logo, websites must achieve a standard
of accessibility exceeding WAI single A and close to WAI AA. See it
Right incorporates nearly all WAI priority one checkpoints, as well as
a range of priority two and three checkpoints which have particular
relevance to users with sight problems.

For more information on See it Right, visit:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/digital/siraccess . Web site managers and
designers should also visit our new free accessibility resource at
http://www.rnib.org.uk/webaccesscentre
for a complete guide to planning, building and testing accessible
websites."


+10: CHINESE STARS: Last issue Fernando Botelho, Technical
Development Director of the eSight Careers Network
(http://www.eSightCareers.Net), wrote in with a request for
information on materials to give someone who is blind access to
Chinese.

It turns out that our indefatigable inbox contributor Chris McMillan,
with Stephen Hallett, runs a charity called China Vision
(http://www.xanadutv.com/chinavision.html) to assist vision-impaired
people in China.

She recommends the World Radio Network's china programmes,
which include a language series, and also has a valuable personal
contact: "Mr Ye Zijie, a blind man living in Huhhot, Inner Mongolia, is
one of the visually impaired Chinese people with whom I correspond
regularly and who has visited the UK to learn computer and other
western skills," she writes. "Ye is also a teacher in a school for the
blind, and would like to help Fernando learn mandarin."

And some advice from Ye Zijie himself: "There are several types of
software containing electronic dictionaries for blind people, with
voices in both English and Chinese. The software I use is called
QingHua ShuangXing (in English the name is QingHua Double Stars).
This software was created by Professor Mao YuHang at QingHua
University in Beijing. It cost around 90 English Pounds, and the
electronic dictionary I bought is around 50 English Pounds."


+11: SMART RESPONSE: Last month Geoff Doggett, project officer
for the Suffolk 'DISC' concessionary card scheme at Mid Suffolk
District Council, wrote in to ask for pointers to information on the
issues surounding use of smart cards by people with a vision
impairment. Sylvie Perera of the RNIB Scientific Research Unit has
responded with some useful links in this field.

"I suggest a search of the RNIB Scientific Research Unit web site for
smart cards," she says. The address is:
http://www.tiresias.org
Resources to be found there include general card guidelines at:
http://www.tiresias.org/guidelines/cards.htm
A paper on 'selecting cards by touch,' at:
http://www.tiresias.org/reports/tdiff.htm
And a European project on smart card user requirements:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/smart4 .


+12: FLAT SCREEN: Steve Richards has a query about flat-screen
computer monitors. "I am thinking about getting a TFT (thin-film
transistor) monitor. However, I use Zoomtext as a magnifying glass on
my monitor which I have set to cover about a quarter of the screen
area.

"When I experimented with it on my wife's old laptop, I found that as I
moved the magnifier across the screen the image beneath it just died
and then came back as I brought the magnifier to rest. This is no good
because I cannot see where I wish to get to as the image has faded. My
wife says that the fading image is a sort of blurring which gives the
impression that it has faded. My big question is: Is this to do with
refresh rates and would a more modern TFT prevent this problem? It is
useless trying to get any help from places like PC World! [Responses
please to inbox@headstar.com].


+13: TRAINING GAP: Sondra Billings of the John Innes Centre
(http://www.jic.bbsrc.ac.uk), a botanical research institute, says there
is a "gap in the market" in the UK for basic accessibility training for
people who are not web experts.

"I should think that there are many other people like myself who have
a communications background rather than a computing background but
have still been asked to take on web management responsibilities. I
[have searched on the web] for tutorials and background reading but
this only takes a novice so far down the road to a full understanding of
accessibility. Are list members aware of any hands-on training for web
accessibility, particularly for the novice level, available in the UK?"


+14: INTERIM MANAGEMENT: Finally Dave Williams, Interim
Director, ACB Radio (http://www.acbradio.org), writes in to correct a
small inaccuracy in our September 'inbox' about ACB radio, an
international resource run by the American Council for the Blind.

The piece stated that Jonathan Mosen was responsible for the running
of ACB Radio, but in fact he stepped down in July, and Williams
himself has been in charge since then on an interim basis. The ACB is
now seeking a permanent replacement:
http://www.acb.org/magazine/2003/bf092003.html#bf03 .

[Section two ends].


++SECTION THREE: INTERVIEW
- PETER BARKER OBE.

+15: BUILDING BRIDGES
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com .

"A number of things in life change when you can't see any more," says
Peter Barker, visiting professor at Reading University's research group
for inclusive environments
(http://www.rdg.ac.uk/ie/staff/peterbarker/pb.htm).

Less than 15 years ago Barker had good enough sight to drive a car, as
he held down a high-powered job as a director in a building and
construction materials company. Soon afterwards however, his failing
sight meant he could no longer drive, and keeping up with paperwork
became almost impossible despite his use of a closed circuit television
document magnification system.

But Barker's problems gave him a new perspective on the industry in
which he had forged his career. As far as providing for the needs of the
disabled, "I was probably doing it the wrong way," he says. And so he
began to concentrate his efforts on researching ways to improve the
navigability of buildings and transport systems.

In this new career - which would eventually see him awarded an OBE
for services to the mobility of disabled people - his rare combination
of personal and professional experience has proved greatly advantageous.
"I can talk the same language [as architects] and can also speak with
some credibility because they know I have personal experience of
visual impairment," he says. One of his first research projects, Project
Rainbow (http://fastlink.headstar.com/rainbow1), concentrated on the
use of colour within a building.

The conclusions were startling. "When I started in the field there were
people who said: "You need to talk about colour-contrasting important
areas of a building and managing lighting levels." But what you really
need to talk about what is 'effective' contrast and 'effective'
lighting."
In many cases, says Barker, it is hard to tell the difference between
what is effective and what is ineffective.

The outcome was a way for architects to rate the effectiveness of
colours they like and compare them to a definition for accepted levels
of colour contrast. Part of this measurement technique has now been
incorporated into British Standard BS8300 on accessible building
design (http://fastlink.headstar.com/bs1) and government road vehicle
accessibility regulations.

Barker's attention has now turned to trying to bring about changes for
visually impaired people in physical mobility and access to
information.

Barker is computer literate, using a computer by converting most text
into speech but also using Braille. But like many who become blind
later in life, he says he is not fluent in Braille. He has a desktop
computer, a laptop and a 'Braille Lite' notetaker
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/fs1), a portable computer with a Braille
output and Braille keyboard with three keys on the left, three on the
right and a space bar across the bottom. The Braille Lite can be used to
download emails and read them in speech or Braille.

On a typical day he says he downloads his emails and newspapers and
magazines sent by email by the Talking Newspapers Association UK
(TNAUK - http://www.tnauk.org.uk), and reads them during his
journey from his home in Tunbridge Wells to his London office. He
also finds time to reply to emails so he can simply upload them on
arrival at his office or hotel.

He regularly reads the Financial Times, the Guardian, Disability Now
and New Scientist, but he complains the Daily Telegraph only arrives
at 2pm because the paper's publisher is slow in sending the digital
copy to TNAUK to be reformatted.

"I don't usually bother with the internet," he says, blaming the
frustration caused by the inaccessibility of most web sites. But he is
beginning to use it more often these days as people increasingly refer
him to sites.

When wishing to recall recorded information he tends to rely mainly
on speech output, because like many people who become blind later in
life, his Braille is not fluent. "In a meeting I use an earphone. But it
is sometimes hard to listen to what people are saying with one ear and
what is in my notes with the other. On these occasions I tend to use
Braille."

He does carry a mobile phone, but can't send text messages or use the
directory of telephone numbers. "I only use a very small part of its
capabilities." This is ironic since the mobile phone is meant to be a
speech communication system. "It will change, I'm sure."

When asked to name the one thing about information technology
which annoys him most, Barker returns to an early technology in need
of improvement. "Why can't you hear the radio on the train when you
go through a tunnel? You can when you drive through the Dartford
tunnel." One feels that if Barker ever becomes involved in railway
construction, such communications problems would soon be solved.

[Section three ends].


++ SECTION FOUR: FOCUS
- WEB STANDARDS.

+16: FIGHTING EUROPEAN FRAGMENTATION
by Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com .

Although awareness of the need to make web sites accessible is now
widespread in Europe, a large number of different guidelines, audit
processes and testing tools exist within each country, creating a
confusing hotchpotch of standards.

To address this problem, the European Accessibility Consortium
(http://www.euroaccessibility.org) was launched in Paris in April this
year.

Some 25 organisations from most European member states and some
countries which are set to join the EU signed a memorandum of
understanding to form the body at this year's annual conference of the
French web portal for people with impaired vision, BrailleNet
(http://www.braillenet.org).

Although most accessibility tools are based around the international
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative
(WAI) guidelines, the founding members of the consortium noted that
there was no harmonised methodology for implementation of the
guidelines; no harmonised methodology for assessing the quality of
web sites; and several different "labels" emerging to certify web
accessibility. It was particularly important for European governments
and other public sector bodies to be working to the same standards, the
members said.

The idea is that eventually, popular accessibility checking tools such
as Bobby, Ask Cynthia and LIFT would become compliant with the
consortium's standards and receive certification to that effect.

But is there a potential of the consortium's work actually clashing with
that of the W3C? "The W3C provide a very important base, they are
internationally recognised," says  says Charles McCathieNevile
(http://www.w3.org/People/Charles) from Spain's Fundacion Sidar
(http://www.sidar.org). "We don't want to change [the WAI
guidelines], we'll provide input. It's very important to us that we're
absolutely compatible and we're working with them, not against
them".

However McCathieNevile says the new consortium is similar to the
W3C in that "like them, we encourage participation". Indeed, the only
prerequisites for an organisation to join are that they come from a
European member state; are proposed for membership by a current
member; and are willing to work. Members come from backgrounds
ranging from private companies like IBM; research institutions like the
University of the Aegean in Greece
(http://www.aegean.gr/intro_en.htm); and disability-related
organisations such as the RNIB, one of three UK members.

It was important that the consortium's membership should embrace
both large and small organisations, McCathieNevile said. "What your
local school does may not be the same as what larger organisations do
in terms of accessibility."

McCathieNevile is chair of the consortium's technical task force, one
of five working groups charged with developing a common evaluation
methodology providing consistent results for web accessibility testing
across different countries and in different languages.

Last month, the task force held its first major technical meeting, out
of which a working draft emerged of a European accessibility testing
methodology, with further technical meetings to be hosted shortly in
the UK by the RNIB. The draft will also be published on the
consortium's web site, one of a series of actions to be taken to ensure
there can be public participation in the body's work.

So, does the consortium seek to create a single way forward on
accessibility to which all of Europe must comply? "Its not about
pushing everyone into a box," McCathieNevile says. "We may be able
to provide technical insight on what can work and what can't but
[policy] is not our role.

"What we're doing is making sure that if you take 10,000 vision-
impaired users across Europe and say 'this will work for you', they
will know that the application of that standard is reliable, and that
web accessibility will be the same in Czech Republic as it is in
Denmark".

[Section four ends].


++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2003 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson  derek@headstar.com
Reporter - Mel Poluck  mel@headstar.com
Correspondent - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk .

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
