+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 88, APRIL 2007.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).

Supported by:
BT Age and Disability Unit
( http://www.btplc.com/age_disability/ )
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk )

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Special Notice: eAccess '07: Technology for All
- 2 May 2007, New Connaught Rooms, London
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess07/ .

E-Access Bulletin's third annual conference and exhibition on access to
technology by people with disabilities is aimed at public sector bodies,
technology suppliers, educational institutions, banks, private sector
providers of goods or services, individuals with a disability and
organisations providing at least some of their information or services
digitally.

Supported by Ability Magazine and the RNIB, eAccess'07 is a high-
level event drawing together all the strands needed for modern public
and private sector organisations to draw up progressive policies on
accessibility.

Speakers include: Richard Howitt MEP, President of the European
Parliament's All-Party Disability Intergroup; Paul Timmers, Head of
ICT at the European Commission's Inclusion Unit and Jonathan
Hassell, Accessibility Editor, BBC Jam; and panellists from RNIB and
University of Southampton.

For more information and to register visit:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess07/
And for sponsorship and exhibition opportunities please contact Claire
Clinton on 01273 231291 or by email at:
claire@headstar.com

[Special notice ends].


++Issue 88 Contents.

++Section One: News.

01: Home Computer Assessments Triumph In eWell-Being Awards.
- annual inclusion award recognises AbilityNet online service.

02: UN Launches Campaign For Inclusive Technology
- seeks partnerships with industry and government.

03: 'Talking Lampposts' Hit The Streets Of Portsmouth
- providing location information when activated.

04: New Browser Aims To Make Video Accessible
- IBM technology includes audio playback options.


News in Brief: 05: Easy Converter - document conversion service; 06:
BBC Jammed - education resource suspended; 07: Site Rewarded -
award for charity website; 08: Free Speech - text to speech software.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
09: Italian Literati - Free audio downloads of Italian literature.

Section Three: Focus - Web Accessibility
10: Now You See It, Now You Don't: A recent exchange between web
accessibility experts on the E-Access Bulletin Live blog revealed some
hot tips and insights into ensuring vision impaired web users get the
best out of "alt tagging" - the descriptions designers attribute to
graphics and images.

Section Four: Focus - Geographical Information Systems.
11: Online Mapping for Everyone. Christopher J. Andrews writes on
the need for the Geographical Information Systems (GIS) profession to
recognise web-based GIS must be accessible to all, particularly among
the "whirlwind of Web 2.0 technology."

[Contents ends].


Section One: News.


+01: Home Computer Assessments Triumph In eWell-Being Awards.

A remote home computer assessment service from UK computing
charity for disabled people, AbilityNet, has won a prestigious annual
award recognising excellence and innovation in the use of information
and communication technologies (ICTs).

The eWell-Being awards
( http://www.sustainit.org/ewell-being-awards/index.php ),
supported by E-Access Bulletin sister publication E-Government
Bulletin, celebrate the social, economic and environmental benefits of
ICT. They are hosted by SustainIT, a sub-group of the charity UK
Centre for Economic and Environmental Development (UK CEED).

AbilityNet's remote assessment
( www.abilitynet.org.uk/athome_remote )
won the 'Age and disability' category, one of nine award categories.
Using Voice Over IP Telephony (VoIP), instant messaging and
webcams, an assessor remotely evaluates the computing needs of users
to best suit their requirements in their own home. So far around 500
people have used the low cost service.

"Its strength is reaching out to disabled people and responding to their
needs in a flexible way," AbilityNet Head of Operations David Banes
told E-Access Bulletin. "It also has potential for opening up
employment to disabled people and assessments are shorter and
sharper." Previously, AbilityNet assessed disabled computer users
from the charity's offices.

The BlueIRIS project from Blackpool, Fylde and Wyre Society for the
Blind in the UK and the Usability Exchange were commended in the
same 'Age and disability' category.

BlueIRIS provides audio news, information and entertainment over the
internet created exclusively for vision impaired people using its own
software. Over 1,200 pieces of original content have been produced
and a national roll-out is planned.

The Usability Exchange employs a range of disabled people to test the
websites of organisations and companies as well as providing a
platform to identify and resolve accessibility problems and help them
understand the experiences of disabled web users.


+02: UN Launches Campaign For Inclusive Technology.

The Global Initiative for Inclusive Information and Communication
Technology, an international campaign to widen access to digital
technologies, has been launched by the United Nations. It aims to
encourage technology vendors to build accessibility into mass-market
products by promoting worldwide adoption of new standards,
regulations and legislation.

Launched at the UN's New York headquarters in March 2007, the
Global Initiative
( http://www.g3ict.com/index.htm )
aims to remove the need for people with disabilities to buy assistive
products that are often expensive and difficult to maintain. In this it
supports Article 9 of the recently unveiled Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, which requires governments to ensure that
"technologies and systems become accessible at minimum cost." For
more, see: http://fastlink.headstar.com/unaccess2 .

Hendrietta Ipeleng Bogopane-Zulu, a vision impaired politician from
South Africa, told the UN that a screen reader is essential for her work
as a member of parliament. "I use [the Freedom Scientific Screen
reader] 'Jaws'. But it's very expensive because it's dollar-based. When
converted to [South Africa's currency] the rand, it becomes
unaffordable for most people," she said.

The main challenge is to strike a balance between changing industry
practices while enabling global markets in accessible products to
develop, which will help to drive down costs, said Axel Leblois,
executive director of the Global Initiative. "Legislation and regulation
can do a lot of good, but they can also fragment markets," he told the
meeting.

In March 2008 the Global Initiative will meet in Geneva to hear
commitments from industry and international organizations to pursue
specific standardization efforts. Regional meetings will be held in
Turkey, Brazil, South Africa, and India, before the campaign draws to
a close in March 2009.


+03: 'Talking Lampposts' Hit The Streets Of Portsmouth.

A public outdoor navigation aid has gone live in Portsmouth city centre
in the UK that "speaks" locations live to vision impaired pedestrians.

The 'talking lampposts' from REACT, provide an audible confirmation
of their location when activated by an electronic fob carried by the
pedestrian. This "audible signposting" is emitted from a small box
attached to nine lampposts located in the city's retail centre using radio
frequencies.

Users hear audible messages such as "you are now at the junction of
Arundel Street and Slindon Street, access to Post Office." Users
purchase the activating fob for 30 pounds or pay a five pound
returnable deposit for daily use, available from council mobility charity
Shopmobility and from the Portsmouth Association for the Blind. "It
gives reassurance. It allows more independence," Portsmouth City
Council City Centre Manager Barry Walker told E-Access Bulletin.

The fobs will also activate REACT boxes located in Leeds where a
similar initiative has been rolled out.
The Portsmouth scheme was funded with 35,000 pounds from
Portsmouth City Council, the Single Regeneration Budget and private
companies. The REACT system was developed in conjunction with the
Royal National Institute of the Blind (RNIB).


+04: New Browser Aims To Make Video Accessible.

Technology giant IBM aims to launch a new web browser providing
vision impaired users with new levels of control over multimedia
content by the end of 2007.

The browser will enable users to adjust and navigate through audio
output from streamed video content using keyboard shortcuts.

Developed by vision impaired employee Dr Chieko Asakawa at IBM's
research laboratory in Tokyo, the browser includes pre-defined
shortcuts that enable users to start and stop video files, adjust the
volume and playback speed of audio output, and choose whether to
listen to the video soundtrack, output from a screen reader, or an audio
description track if it is present.
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/abrowser ).

The browser aims to solve two main problems vision impaired people
experience with online video content: playback is usually controlled
with buttons, and files often launch automatically when a web page is
opened. At present, the so-called 'A-Browser' has been developed to
work with the Windows Media Player and Adobe Flash content, but it
is not yet clear how many of the numerous other multimedia formats it
will be compatible with.


++News in Brief:

+05: Easy Converter: A desktop application allowing organisations to
convert their Word and pdf documents into accessible structured html
web pages has been launched by Northern Ireland software company
RiverDocs. RiverDocs Converter costs 399 pounds and is available
from:
http://www.riverdocs.com .

+06: BBC Jammed: The free interactive online learning service for
schoolchildren aged between five and 16, 'Jam' from the BBC, has
been suspended after legal arguments from private sector companies
that it is damaging their commercial interests. Ofcom is undertaking a
market impact assessment and public consultation on the issue:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/jam2 .

+07: Site Rewarded: British charity Vision 2020 has won an award for
its user friendly website which provides vision impaired people with an
online library, bulletin board and online discussion forum as well as
alerts for relevant events and activities. The National ICT Hub Awards
are hosted by the UK charity the National Council for Voluntary
Organisations:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/vision2020 .

+08: Free Speech: Free text to speech software for speakers of
Belarusian, Russian and English has been launched aimed at students.
The Sakrament LibReader has been developed by Russian speech
technology company Sakrament with the support of UNESCO
Moscow:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/sac1 .


[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+09: Italian Literati. Corrado Calza writes: "Salve! This is a very brief
contribution to let readers know about a new service by the Italian
National Broadcasting Company (RAI). Through its internet site, RAI
provides plenty of mp3 audiobooks free to download. They are
regularly updated good quality Italian readings of novels, but mostly
short novels, by major international authors like Katherine Mansfield,
Guy De Maupassant, Kafka and many others.

"This is the direct link to the download web pages:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/itrai1 .

"The site is only in Italian but there is a text only version you can get
by clicking on the 'Solo testo' hot spot at the bottom left of the page.
Once you get the 'Solo testo' version, downloadable audiobooks are in
the last chapter named 'Audiolibri.'

"'Ascolta' is listen; 'Scarica' is download. To scroll the list of all the
audiobooks available you can use the hotspots 'Precedenti 10'
(Previous 10) and 'Prossimi 10' (Next 10). The pages are sponsored by
the Italian National Blind Association (UIC) but none of my blind
friends have ever heard about this service."
[Responses to inbox@headstar.com].

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three: Web Accessibility
- Alt Tagging.

+10: Now You See It, Now You Don't
by Leonie Watson and Patrick H. Lauke.

The following exchange comes from posts made on E-Access Bulletin
Live, the blog of E-Access Bulletin
(http://www.headstar.com/eablive/ ):

So just what is a decorative image? It seems to me that one person's
eye candy is another person's emotional link to a website. For some,
decorative images are those horizontal rules, bullets and other forms of
minor 'clip art' we find sprinkled around the web. For others, the term
is wider ranging. It includes more content rich images such as photos
and artwork.
So, you might ask, what's the problem with this varied point of view?
The answer is simple: alt texts.
If you Google for the term "decorative image + alt texts", you'll come
across countless sites that suggest that a decorative image be given a
'null alt text.' It's possible that we can all agree that for minor forms of
clipart, a null alt text will do nicely. But it gets a little more difficult
when it comes to more complex images.
I'm not talking about diagrams, blueprints or other information rich
images. There's no argument that they should always carry an alt text,
possibly even a long description. I mean the vibrant, emotion rich
images that provide a website with a sense of atmosphere.
It's sometimes argued that providing such images with descriptive alt
texts provides too much "noise" for a screen reader user. If we screen
reader users stopped to listen to every alt text, every time we came
across an image, then this assumption would probably be right. But I'll
let you into a secret: we won't.
Like sighted users, we'll skip around the content of the page until we
find something that interests us. If the first few syllables of an alt text
sound promising, we'll pause to read. If they don't, we'll move on to
the next element on the page. Also like sighted users, we're often
likely to pause on something unimportant, but which captures our
imagination.
A good alt text can conjure up wonderfully stimulating mental images.
A friendly smile is the same in print, photo or wax crayon. Whether
you listen to an image or see it, the emotional response is the key
factor, so why should we recommend that these emotion rich images
should be given a null alt text and hidden from screen reader users?
Perhaps it's time we introduced another group of images: 'emotion rich
images' and encouraged the practice of providing descriptive alt texts
for them. If people don't want to listen to the alt text, they won't. If
people don't want to pause and look at the image, they won't. In either
case, it's good to have the choice.
What would they sound like? For me, they would describe the content
of the picture to the extent I could understand the reason it had been
put there. [Web consultancy] Nomensa's Christmas card last year, sent
out digitally, contained a picture of a little girl standing in the middle
of a snow covered glade, surrounded by fir trees. She had her arms
flung out sideways and her face lifted to the falling snow. The strapline
was "experience is everything".
I could picture that scene perfectly. Even if I'd never seen fir trees or
had no idea what different colours really looked like, I could still
conjur up the feeling of snow falling, the bracing air, feeling good,
feeling happy, feeling alive.
People get worried about alt texts, but they're just the same as
describing a picture to a friend on the phone. You use language that
describes the moment captured in the image, that's all.
- Response by Patrick H. Lauke:
In many situations, 'fluff' images, I'm particularly thinking of those
stock photography monstrosities like 'businessmen shaking hands,' are
only there to give a visual representation of the tone of voice that
should already be present in a page's copy. In those situations, I would
strongly argue that, even without descriptive alt text, the mental images
would be conjured up by the tone of voice of the body copy itself.
As ever, it's impossible to generalise rules for alt [tagging]. It all
depends on context, and on whether or not the same meaning and the
more ephemeral "feel" are maintained.
- Response by Leonie Watson:
Patrick's right, in as much as it's difficult to create general rules for
this, but I'm not sure I place so much faith in the linguistic capability
of body copy. If every web page were littered with evocative phrases
such as "stock photography monstrosities", then things might be
different. The catch is that a phrase like that is only evocative because I
know exactly what he means when he writes it.
Perhaps this is the rub. Not every visually impaired person was born
that way. I could see perfectly until my mid 20s, so I know what
Patrick means by "stock photography monstrosities." Someone who
had never seen at all would have less understanding, but the
description "business men shaking hands" still conveys something to
everyone.
That's the key factor, one person's monstrosity is another person's Van
Gogh. The choice should be theirs, not the developer's. Of course,
stock photography is something I personally don't miss in the least.
NOTE: Leonie Watson is Head of the Accessibility Research
Programme at web consultancy Nomensa and Patrick H. Lauke is a
freelance web developer.
[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Describe Online - Bringing Customers to You!
- Providing Online Text Guides to Public Venues.

Our mission is that every public venue shall have a text guide which
explains that it exists; where it is; how to get there via public transport;
what's on offer and how to obtain and use it.

Our accessible website at:
http://www.describe-online.com
contains models of guides to a wide range of transport, civic,
commercial and other venues. Our guides complement emerging
technologies such as GPS and GIS systems.

Bring more customers to your venues through our service.
Contact us on: 0141 423 2683 or:
terry@describe-online.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Four: Focus
- Geographical Information Systems.

+11: Online Mapping for Everyone
by Christopher J. Andrews.
The Geographical Information Systems (GIS) profession has always
maintained a community-focused perspective that pervades both the
development and use of geospatial technology. That perspective
undoubtedly grows out of the fact that working with map data leads to
the realisation that the world is fundamentally finite and has few
insurmountable barriers.
Geospatial technologists currently find themselves in the whirlwind of
Web 2.0 technology, which has popularized web-based GIS in a
manner that threatens to wrest the concept of the GIS developer away
from the GIS community. The GIS establishment has the responsibility
to bring its heightened level of community awareness to these new
technologies and applications of GIS.
An area that has been underrepresented in GIS technology but which
addresses fundamental characteristics of GIS data openness and
sharing is making web-based GIS tools more accessible to visually
impaired and blind users.

Many writers have described the internet as a levelling technology that
improves access to information for everyone. The reality is that the
internet offers a variety of technologies for information sharing, some
of which are accessible to anyone who can read text and some which
are not as accessible. Companies are rapidly adopting web
development techniques such as Adobe Flash, graphic design and
[programming language] JavaScript to enhance the user's experience.
Unfortunately, poorly designed Flash animations, images with no
descriptive, alternative ('alt') text, and JavaScript-masked hyperlinks
(anchors in a Web page that use JavaScript to redirect the page instead
of simpler html) will impede the ability of blind users to access
internet-based information. Also, poor colour choices and fixed text
sizes may render websites useless for colourblind or moderately
visually impaired users.

The population of web users with some sort of visual impairment may
be larger than you realise. It's safe to say that at least 5.5 per cent of
the
web-surfing population is colourblind (based on a calculation of the
proportion of the general public that is colourblind -
http://waynesword.palomar.edu/colorbl1.htm .
Male-to-female internet usage ratios actually suggest that the number
may be closer to 7 per cent or 8 per cent in the US). According to the
American Foundation for the Blind, approximately 1.5 million
American computer users are blind or visually impaired (see:
http://www.afb.org/Section.asp?SectionID=15#num ).

Furthermore, consider anecdotal evidence such as this: during a casual
conversation, a friend of mine mentioned that the CEOs of her two
former companies both needed to adjust web browser fonts to the
maximum size to read web pages. Some of the current web technology
trends include [programming tools] Ajax, user interface tools that
heavily employ JavaScript, complex style sheets that use fixed font
sizes and even mapping applications with built-in Flash and other less
accessible technologies. Because of these trends, a gap has developed
that threatens to make web-based GIS and non-GIS applications less
accessible to the blind and visually impaired.

There are compelling legal reasons for GIS developers to build web-
based mapping applications that provide access to the range of visually
impaired and blind web surfers. Numerous localities including the UK,
the US and many individual states have legislation that has been
interpreted by their respective courts to require that websites used by
government employees or served by the government to the general
public must be accessible to internet users with visual disabilities.

Once the need for creating accessible GIS websites is recognised, the
next step will be to figure out how to evaluate a website for
accessibility. For legally blind web surfers, a website needs to be
"readable," in that an assistive technology application is used to speak
aloud all of the readable text on a page with some context information
to support navigation. A combination of straightforward html element
use and nuanced page layout combine to facilitate website readability
for such users. Additional techniques improve readability for
colourblind and visually impaired users.

Although many projects may not budget the time for accessibility
development and the expense of acquiring text to speech software for
web browsing, the Lynx text-based Web browser
( http://lynx.browser.org/ )
can show the sighted user a rough idea of the website text that will be
read to a blind user. While not used heavily by the blind or visually
impaired community, the Lynx browser is free and offers sighted users
some insight as to how informative and navigable the text information
in a web page may be. Be aware that some page reading software will
process JavaScript and Flash, so Lynx is not a complete representation
of how a website reads to a blind surfer.
Once the GIS developer has digested all the tools to assess website
accessibility, the realisation strikes home that ultimately GIS has one
simple problem. The most popular representation for GIS data on the
internet is an image. Is it even possible to make an image more
accessible to blind or visually impaired users? In fact, there are many
techniques available to GIS developers to make map applications
compliant with accessibility laws and standards.

New technologies, such as the recently introduced Google KML search
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/kml1 )
may also open up the interaction between the web and the real world
for the blind mapping enthusiast. Future web mapping applications and
GPS sharing sites might keep in mind the use of technologies such as
voice- and GPS-enabled personal digital assistants (PDAs) and touch
tablet technology that open up geospatial data collection and analysis
to the blind.
The GIS industry has long recognized the levelling ability of mapping
data and technology. The industry must ensure that its traditional
community-based ethics perpetuate, even as inevitable changes in
technologies and applications take GIS in new directions. Ensuring and
enhancing accessibility to web mapping applications for blind and
visually impaired web users seem like the obvious place to start.
NOTE: Christopher J. Andrews is a Senior Consultant at MWH Global
in the US. This article originally appeared in Directions Magazine and
is reprinted here with permission, copyright Directions Media, 2007.
[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
