+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 96, DECEMBER 2007.

A Headstar publication.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 96 Contents.

01: Technology Giants Forge Accessibility Alliance
- Microsoft, Adobe, HP and others collaborate on tools and standards.

02: EU Countries Set To Miss 2010 Accessibility Targets
= European progress report reveals patchy progress.

03: Tourism Websites Fall Short On Accessibility
- Just one site of 10 reviewed meets 'acceptable' standards.

News in Brief: 04: DAISY Save - electronic book format plug-in for
Microsoft Word; 05: 2020 Framework - national vision policy
consultation; 06: Million Strong - online petition on disability law.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum. 07: Apple Tasting - call
for views on technology firm; 08: Moodle Extras - educational
software platform; 09: Misplaced Responsibility? built-in accessibility
is best; 10: Ubuntu Update - text browser packaged with Linux brand;
11: Unequal Opportunity - online job application struggles; 12:
Barcamp Call: government websites event.

Section Three: Special Report, Part One - UK Newspaper Web Sites
and Accessibility.
13: Here Is The News - If You Can Find It: Newspaper websites
should be liberating for people with impaired vision, allowing to access
stories at the same time as everybody else. But new research from
Journalism.co.uk shows that many are being denied this ability through
poor website design.

Section Four: Special Report, Part Two - UK Newspaper Web Sites
and Accessibility.
14: Mixed Bag: Selected Findings from the Journalism.co.uk Study: a
round-up of high and low points of the research into all the major UK
national newspaper websites, by publication.

[Contents ends].


++Special notice: Mobile and Flexible Working in the Public Sector
- 23 January 2008, RIBA, London
- 100 Pound Early Bird Discount for Pre-Christmas Booking
http://www.headstar-events.com/flexible08/ .

Mobile and flexible working practices can help public sector bodies'
staff work closer to the citizen and reduce the carbon footprint of your
organisation. And flexible working practices ensure that services can
be delivered 24-7.

Headstar is pleased to announce the third annual conference on Mobile
and Flexible Working in the Public Sector will take place on 23
January 2008, at RIBA, central London. A superb speaker line-up
features Stephen Regan, Head of Management and Technologies
Programmes at Cranfield University; and Colin Rowland of Cheshire
County Council. Book before Christmas to qualify for a 100 pound
discount. To see the full programme and to register online, see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/flexible08/ .

And for information about sponsoring or exhibiting at the event please
email Claire Clinton on:
claire@headstar.com
or call her on 01273 231291.

[Special notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Technology Giants Forge Accessibility Alliance.

A group of the world's leading technology companies have forged a
new alliance to harmonise accessibility standards, techniques and tools
in a move one leading accessibility analyst is calling "the most exciting
and significant accessibility development of the past 12 months."

Founder members of the Accessibility Interoperability Alliance (AIA -
http://www.accessinteropalliance.org )
include Adobe, BayFirst Solutions, HP, Microsoft and Novell, as well
as specialist assistive technology companies such as Claro Software,
Dolphin Computer Access, GW Micro, HiSoftware, Madentec,
Texthelp Systems and QualiLife.

The group will collaborate on a range of engineering projects intended
to increase interoperability between existing technologies; design new
technologies or solutions; improve developer guidelines; lower
development costs; and increase accessibility innovation.

Initial projects will include developing a set of keyboard shortcuts to
provide consistent behaviour to users of assistive technology products
in any web browser; improving the interoperability and exchange of
information between IT hardware and software and assistive
technology (AT) products; and adding accessibility features and
capabilities to software user interfaces.

"Today, developers must work across divergent platforms, application
environments and hardware models to create accessible technology for
customers with disabilities," Rob Sinclair, director of the Accessibility
Business Unit at Microsoft, said in a statement issued at the alliance's
launch last week. "The AIA is an opportunity for the entire industry to
come together to reduce the cost and complexity of accessibility,
increase customer satisfaction, foster inclusive innovation, and
reinforce a sustainable ecosystem of accessible technology products."

The project could also create new markets for existing specialist
accessibility technologies, the alliance said. "This is the most exciting
and significant accessibility development of the past 12 months," Julie
Howell, Director of Accessibility at web design agency Fortune
Cookie and former head of accessibility at RNIB told E-Access
Bulletin.

"Equality for disabled people means access to the same content at the
same time, in the same time, at the same cost and with the same ease as
everyone else. The battle for e-accessibility will be won when the
developers of tools that author and access web content work together in
harmony. Access technology developers have worked with mainstream
IT developers in the past, and when they have, disabled people have
benefited."


+02: EU Countries Set To Miss 2010 Accessibility Targets.

European member states are in danger of missing targets for a more
inclusive information society pledged for achievement by 2010,
according to a major new international study published by the
European Commission last month.

A pattern of "eAccessibility gaps, deficits and patchworks" was
revealed by the study, 'Measuring progress of eAccessibility in
Europe' (MeAC) (
http://fastlink.headstar.com/meac1 ).

In a declaration made in Riga in 2006, EU ministers pledged to halve
the gaps in computer literacy and access across Europe and ensure all
public websites are accessible by 2010. However progress remains
"fragmented and slow", the new study finds, and "most of the Riga
objectives will not be met on time". More than one in three Europeans
are still excluded from fully benefiting from the digital society, it finds.

The report says: "Accessibility of public websites remains stuck at 5
per cent. Only 10 per cent of people aged over 64 are internet users
while the average in Europe is 47 per cent. Without further
intervention, the gap will only be halved in 2015 instead of 2010."
Lower-educated, economically inactive and elderly people at the
greatest risk of being left behind, the report finds.

However, the research says there is evidence of the effectiveness of
EU-level policies in progressing e-accessibility in Europe, and
acknowledges legislative progress made by three individual states:
Italy, Spain and the UK.

In an attempt to accelerate progress, the commission has adopted a new
framework to integrate e-Inclusion actions across Europe, and is
considering new legislative measures similar to the accessibility
aspects of the US Americans with Disabilities Act.

It has also launched a year-long awareness campaign for 2008 entitled
'e-Inclusion, be part of it!', to culminate with a ministerial conference
to reinforce commitments at all levels (see
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/einclusion ).

Speaking at the campaign's launch Viviane Reding, EU Commissioner
for Information Society and Media, said: "It is neither morally
acceptable nor economically sustainable to leave millions of people
behind, unable to use information and communications technologies to
their advantage.

"Progress has been only half as fast as it should be. The commission is
sending today a clear signal to all parties concerned: industry,
regulators and governments that we must act together now to ensure a
barrier-free information society for all."


+03: Tourism Websites Fall Short On Accessibility.

Almost all UK tourism websites are failing to meet basic acceptable
standards of accessibility, according to a new report from technology
access charity AbilityNet.

The report, the latest in a series of 'State of the eNation' surveys by the
charity, assessed ten websites at random from a list of the most popular
UK visitor attractions. The sites were rated using a five star scale from
'very inaccessible' (one star) to 'very accessible' (five stars), with
three stars representing an 'adequate' level of accessibility.

Only one of the ten sites examined - the Glasgow Science Centre - met
or exceeded this 'adequate' threshold. The centre's site
(http://www.glasgowsciencecentre.org) has been improved in the past
year with accessibility in mind and as a result achieved four stars.

Of the other sites assessed, four achieved two stars (the Eden Project,
The Giant's Causeway, National Waterfront Museum and Portmeirion)
and five were deemed very inaccessible, receiving only one star
(Belfast Zoo, The Burns Heritage Museum, Edinburgh Castle, Kew
Gardens and the London Eye).

Sites which fail to meet the three-star level may be falling short of
service access requirements set out in the UK's Disability
Discrimination Act, AbilityNet says.

The report took into account sites' compliance with the international
World Wide Web Consortium's Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines, as well as the practical difficulties that visitors with a range
of disabilities may experience. Among the features that cause problems
are small text that cannot be resized; unnecessary complexity; closely
clustered buttons; unlabeled images and over-reliance on visual clues.
Since the audit was taken at least three of the single-star-rated
attractions have expressed a commitment to improving the accessibility
of their websites.


++News in Brief:

+04: DAISY Save: A free plug-in allowing users of Microsoft Word to
'Save As DAISY' - saving files in a format which can be converted
into a DAISY electronic book - will be available in early 2008. The
DAISY format allows users to scroll through text, skip to and from
different sections and footnotes much like a reader might with a printed
text. It is hoped the new plug-in will encourage publishers to make
more texts available to DAISY users:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/daisy2 .

+05: 2020 Framework: A draft strategic framework for the
improvement of eye health, prevention of sight loss, and support for
the visually impaired in the UK has been published by Vision2020 UK,
an umbrella organisation focused on visual health. Among the many
initiatives is a call for the communications regulator, Ofcom to push
for an increase in the proportion of television and radio broadcasts
offering audio description from 10% to 50% within 15 years.
Consultation on the UK Vision Strategy runs to 17 January 2008:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/vision1 .

+06: Million Strong: More than 200,000 people have signed an online
petition calling for improved legislation protecting the rights of
Europe's fifty-million disabled people, as part of a combined online
and offline petition campaign by the European Disability Forum,
'1million4disability'. Last month the campaign met its initial target of
raising a million signatures in nine months, presenting around
1,300,000 names to the European Commission. The website is still
active, at:
http://www.1million4disability.eu .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: Apple Tasting: E-Access Bulletin is researching an article on the
accessibility features of the new Apple operating system 'Leopard' and
all other Apple products such as the iPod and iPhone. We would
appreciate views from readers who may have disabilities and who use
Apple products as to their strengths and weaknesses, and also would
also welcome people's general perceptions of Apple as a company and
of the firm's approach to accessibility.

Please send all comments to inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Moodle Extras: In our October issue (story number 11, section
three) Nick Freear and Chetz Colwell wrote on their experiences of
ensuring the accessibility of the widely-used open source online
education platform Moodle at the UK's Open University. Due to an
oversight some useful links were left out of this piece, and Nick writes
in to set this right.

To find out more about Moodle, readers can visit:
http://moodle.org
and for more on current accessibility work on the platform, see:
http://docs.moodle.org/en/Accessibility .

The authors would also like to add some acknowledgements: the work
is a collaboration involving Open University colleagues, Moodle.com
developers and many others, and the community on the Moodle.org
forums.


+09: Misplaced Responsibility? Linda Woodbury, a reader in San
Diego, California, sends in some striking general observations on
accessibility that make particularly interesting reading alongside this
issue's announcement of a new accessibility alliance between a group
of major technology firms (see story one, News, this issue).

She writes: "Why do you think that we continue to develop technology
for blind persons to read appliances, digital read-outs, signs and street
information, etcetera, etcetera, when the blind person then is always
responsible for determining which device to use, often affording the
cost, and burdened with carrying extra equipment everywhere?

"Wouldn't it seem more advantageous to press hard for all corporations
and government entities to simply offer built-in accessibility into their
products, services and marketing efforts wherever it is at all possible?
Simple solutions which cost only a minor change in product
development and packaging would seem a good start. To this point, it
always seems the responsibility of the blind individual, who often has
the least resources, to bear the cost."

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+10: Ubuntu Update: Jeff Seager, Communications Specialist at the
West Virginia Division of Rehabilitation Services, writes in to add to
his Inbox contribution in our last issue. Jeff had sung the praises of the
Ubuntu brand of Linux for prioritising accessibility by automatically
installing the open source 'Orca' screen reader software.

He now adds: "A few days after my first note to you, I realised that the
Lynx text browser also was installed by default in the new 7.10 version
of Ubuntu Linux. I hadn't noticed this sooner because I'd installed and
customised Lynx myself in Ubuntu 7.04, and my customised version
remains intact.

"Like the default GUI web browser in Ubuntu, the newly installed
Lynx opens (the first time, and until you change the home page) with a
page tailored for new users of Ubuntu, linking to more Ubuntu learning
resources. Nicely implemented accessibility for those who need or
prefer a text-only browser."

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+11: Unequal Opportunity: Further to our contribution last month from
reader Norman Waddington, who experienced accessibility difficulties
applying for a job online with a local authority, another reader, David
Rosser, writes in to offer his own similar experience.

"I can sympathise and relate to Norman Waddington's article on the
difficulties experienced applying for a job.

"I myself am visually impaired and recently tried to apply for a job
online with the NHS and found it less than user-friendly. I visited my
local job centre and asked for a hard copy of the application form and
was told by the job centre I would not get an interview as they prefer
online applications.

"I feel more should be done in improving the accessibility of online
application forms to enable people with visual impairments to have
equality. Improving online applications for jobs would be a positive
step for everyone as it would make the lives of visually impaired
people easier but also sighted people as well."

[Further comments please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+12: Barcamp Call: Alex Stobart of the Scottish Executive writes in to
draw E-Access Bulletin readers' attention to 'BarcampUKGovWeb', a
proposed two-day 'Barcamp' meeting he is helping to organise to
discuss issues relating to government websites. The event is planned
for the weekend of 26 and 27 January 2008 in central London.

The 'barcamp' format refers to a new, informal style of event that is
planned collaboratively online, with everyone who plans to attend also
pledging to help out in some way with speaking, chairing or
organisation. Stobart says that one of the participants has specifically
asked that the organisers invite people from the accessibility
community, and this is why he has written in to this newsletter.

For more information see:
http://barcamp.org/BarcampUKGovweb .

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three: Special Report, Part One
- UK Newspaper Web Sites and Accessibility.

+13: Here Is The News - If You Can Find It.

In the world before the internet, blind people had to rely on a limited
range of newspaper articles - selected by others - being deemed
suitable for translation into Braille or other formats, and posted out far
too late to be meaningfully termed 'news'.

With the web, theoretically the playing field is levelled; anyone who
can access a computer including blind screen-reader users and people
with impaired vision can access the websites of the major newspapers
at the same time as everybody else, reading the headlines as they break
and picking the articles they want to read - however trashy - from the
entire range.

That is, of course, assuming that the newspaper websites are accessible
to screen-readers and other special access technologies. But according
to a major new piece of research into the accessibility of newspaper
websites from the specialist journalism news site Journalism.co.uk, this
is not a safe assumption.

Last month Journalism.co.uk asked a group of blind or visually-
impaired volunteers to carry out user testing on eight of the main
national newspaper sites: the Express; the Guardian; the Independent;
the Daily Mail; the Mirror; the Sun; the Daily Telegraph; and the
Times. The volunteers were John Allnutt, a JAWS screen-reader user
(version 3.7), and three young students from the Royal London Society
for the Blind's Dorton College: Rosie Johnson, Josh Pinnell and
Charlotte West.

The group was asked to carry out a series of tasks on each site
including to access the current lead story at each website; navigate to a
news story of interest to them away from the home page; locate and
play a piece of audio or video; use the search function to track down a
story; find and interact with the blogs or reader feedback sections; and
locate the accessibility information section, if present. They were also
invited to record their general overall impressions of each site.

The results were mixed, to say the least. Only the Guardian and the
Daily Mail websites were found to have sections dedicated to
accessibility, and only the Daily Mail provided a text-only version of
its website for blind and visually impaired people. No newspaper site
has yet earned an RNIB 'See It Right' logo, awarded for excellence in
this area.

Navigation around the sites by screen-reader users and people with
impaired vision was often hampered by confusing site layouts and
structures, and pop-up advertisements that appeared without warning
and with no textual explanation.

All the sites did have at least some positive features relating to
accessibility, though there was little consistency throughout, and they
all presented the volunteers with problems as well.

Analysing the results for Journalism.co.uk, Richard Warren, technical
manager at web usability consultancy Userite, said: "None of the eight
newspapers reviewed have grasped the fundamental difference
between the internet and the print media. All have tried to replicate the
look of their printed version and just added a confusing set of
navigation menus.

"The result is a collection of cluttered pages that are not very user-
friendly and make little, or no, concession to disabled users."

A common problem found by the survey was the need to listen to an
extensive list of links (navigation menus) and other page furniture
before getting to the main content of the page, Warren said. This is
because Jaws (and other assistive software) reads the page in the order
in which it is written.

"The sighted user has his or her attention drawn to the main story in
the middle of the page by the colour and size of the headline font and
associated images. The blind user has to listen whilst Jaws works it
way through all the menus, advertisements and other clutter on the
page," he said.

"There is an easy solution to [this] problem, which is to introduce a
new link at the top of the page that takes the user directly to the main
page content thus avoiding all the navigation links. The Mirror, Daily
Mail and Guardian each provide this option with varying degrees of
success.

"The Guardian and Daily Mail even try to provide a selection of
shortcut keys [but] this technology is incorrectly implemented on both
newspapers and could cause users to save unwanted files on their
computer rather than navigate to the required page."

A second, common problem found by the research was the use of pop-
up windows. "These are annoying for sighted readers, but they can be a
disaster for the blind who often have no way of knowing that the focus
of Jaws has changed from the main page to a pop-up window," said
Warren.

"As a result the reviewer tried to continue navigating as if he was on
the original page and got totally lost."

Some features of the sites would cause problems not just for those with
impaired vision but for people with impaired movement as well, the
research found. Many of the sites use pull-down menus for navigation,
but sighted people with limited mouse control would often be unable to
select accurately from these menus. The cursor frequently loses its
focus on the menu, which then closes before they have had time to
select the desired option, Warren said.

Other problems were experienced by the volunteers in accessing the
sites' video news content and interactive blogs. "Videos and blogs are
newer technologies so the accessibility functions might not be as well
known. However this is still not an excuse for not trying," he said.

"Videos should have an alternative transcript of the associated audio
available for deaf people to read and an alternative text description of
the scene/s to enable blind people to put the audio into context."

The solution to most of these issues is to follow the main accepted
international standards for web accessibility, Warren said. "The Daily
Mail provided a text-only version of its website for blind and visually
impaired people, but the link to this was so far down the page that
blind people may fail to find it. However, the provision of text-only
pages is not the only, or indeed the most desirable, solution for
accessibility.

"The newspapers tested could easily apply the W3C Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) to their existing content, make
better use of their style sheets so that important content is coded near
the top of the page and use the HTML codes for headings and lists in a
proper manner."

Ultimately, the newspapers themselves could lose out by failing to
properly embrace issues of accessibility, says Oliver Luft of
Journalism.co.uk. "Despite the obvious benefits for users, good
accessibility has advantages for publishers, including higher ranking
and more matches from search engines, which can more accurately
index the content," Luft says.

"Yet these benefits are overlooked by many of the UK's major
newspapers in their online strategies."

NOTE: For selected results from the research by newspaper see
Section Four, this issue.
And for full details, see:
http://www.journalism.co.uk/5/articles/530590.php

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Special Report, Part Two
- UK Newspaper Web Sites and Accessibility.

+14: Mixed Bag: Selected Findings from the Journalism.co.uk Study.

The specialist website Journalism.co.uk has published an in-depth
study into the accessibility and usability of the websites of the UK's
main national newspapers (see Section Three, this issue). In part two of
our report on this study, we present a round-up of the good points and
bad points of all the sites surveyed.


- The Express
http://www.express.co.uk
- Good News: Good layout of blogs section, which lists content in a
similar style to news articles, with an appropriate headline indicating to
the screen reader user what lies behind each link.

- Bad News: The site's search engine, instead of immediately
informing the user of how many results they have and displaying them,
presented the volunteers with out of context links to Madeleine
McCann and Princess Diana among the first returns with no
explanation that these were commonly-searched-for terms.


- The Guardian
http://www.guardian.co.uk
- Good News: The site - a favourite with volunteers - features an
accessibility tool as the third link read out by JAWS on entering a
page. While this resizing tool - aimed at users with visual impairments
- does feature on other newspaper sites, it is rarely so prominent.

- Bad News: Takes JAWS users a long time to tab through to the top
news stories of the day in the site's navigation bar. "Sighted users
might be able to identify where the news content is instantly, but I have
no idea. JAWS has to work its way through all these different sections
first," said John Allnutt.


- The Independent
http://www.independent.co.uk
Good news: The website includes a tool to resize fonts at the bottom of
the page, which is useful to visually impaired users. And the paper
says: "We are currently in the process of redesigning the website and
are taking accessibility into account, not least by retaining scaleable
fonts."

Bad news: A recent redesign of the blogs section has given it a layout
completely at odds with the rest of the site. The blogs page also
contained some pop-up advertising, confusing for screen reader users.
Overall, the volunteers found this site one of the hardest to use.


- The Daily Mail
http://www.dailymail.co.uk
- Good News: The site makes regular use of a 'skip to main navigation'
link, which allowed the volunteers to bypass much of the extraneous
navigational 'furniture' on each page.

- Bad News: A change of left-hand navigation bar in the blogs section
was disorientating for John, who was uncertain how to navigate from
this page to other sections of the site.


- The Mirror
http://www.mirror.co.uk
- Good News: The results pages for a search were not inundated with
adverts, as was the case on other sites, allowing JAWS to access the
results more quickly.

- Bad News: The news navigation process was 'convoluted' and
'misleading'. A 'skip to main content' link seemed like a promising
way to avoid adverts, but in fact led John to a long list of showbiz
news stories rather than the main news section.


- The Sun
http://www.thesun.co.uk
- Good News: The position and heading on the top stories help readers
with impaired vision identify that they are important. The size of the
text is good and The Sun's direct style gives a clear impression of what
story is about.

- Bad News: The search facility searched the entire world wide web by
default rather than this website, without informing the user, as the site
uses a drop down menu rather than radio buttons to change this feature.


- The Telegraph
http://www.telegraph.co.uk
- Good News: When first entering the site, John's screen reader
immediately began reading the main news content - a rare and
welcome pleasure.

- Bad News: Clicking through on a link to an article in the education
section did not provide instant access to the piece. Instead, JAWS read
the headline but then had to trawl all the navigation bars and adverts
before reaching the story.


- The Times
http://www.timesonline.co.uk
- Good News: Search engine results page was found to be very
accessible as it was uncluttered and included summaries for each
result, as well as the author and date of stories listed.

- Bad News: First the home page reeled off the site's technical
parameters, then took the volunteers into a host of holiday adverts,
without any heading identifying them as adverts to screen reader users.

NOTE: For full details of the research, see:
http://www.journalism.co.uk/5/articles/530590.php

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all
your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Reporter: Majeed Saleh
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey
Marketing Executive - Claire Clinton
Sales and Marketing - Jo Knell, Will Knox.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue 96 ends.]
