+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 91, JULY 2007.

A Headstar publication.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .



++Special notice: Techshare Expo 2007
- 4-5 October 2007, Novotel, London

Techshare Expo 2007 is set to be the biggest ever European exhibition
on access to the information society by people with disabilities.

Supported by RNIB, RNID, Dyslexia Action and E-Access Bulletin,
Techshare Expo 2007 is a fabulous new showcase for products,
services and organisations working to ensure that people with
disabilities can participate fully in the information age. It is the place
where decision makers from across the private and public sectors, and
people with disabilities and their carers will attend to source new
products and services, meet with suppliers and be inspired by the
innovations and ideas on show from exhibitors.

For details and to register see:
http://www.techshare-expo.com/ .

The exhibition is expected to attract more than 1,000 visitors. To find
out more please contact Claire Clinton at Headstar at:
claire@headstar.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Issue 91 Contents.

++Section One: News.

01: Training Portal For Personal Computing Launches
- ground-breaking e-learning resource from AbilityNet.

02: Guide Aims To Push Accessibility Up The IT Agenda
- free advice and information for IT Directors in all sectors.

03: New Accessibility Guidelines Will Be More "Testable"
- W3C member offers insights into WCAG 2.0.

News in Brief: 04: Innovators Sought - disabled entrepreneur of the
year award launched; 05: Face Up - popular social networking site
creates accessible user verification; 06: Easy Read - Google book
search enhances accessibility.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Underground Scene - tube train navigation update; 08: Course
Response - web design course suggestions; 09: CMS Enquiry - Help
the Hospices charity request; 10: Inaccessible PARIS - legal and
technical questions.

Section Three: Conference Report - Web Accessibility.
11: Power To The New Generation: The launch of the second version
of WCAG, the global benchmark for web accessibility, has been mired
in delays. Experts updated delegates on progress and gave some
insights into the changes it will bring at the annual conference
'Building the perfect council website,' in London. Mel Poluck listened
in.

Section Four: Multimedia Devices - Q and A.
12: Moving On Up: E-Access Bulletin interviews Isaac Porat, the
creator of exciting new free software providing access to selected news
and entertainment audio content from the web, among others, aimed at
users with lower IT skills, developed as a labour of love.

[Contents ends].


Section One: News.


+01: Training Portal For Personal Computing Launches.

What is thought to be the biggest online training portal created to date
for learning about assistive technology, featuring e-learning and live
online tutoring, has been launched by the charity AbilityNet.

The AT training portal
( http://www.abilitynettraining.org )
is based on the open source learning platform Moodle
(http://moodle.org ).
Courses available range from a general introduction to assistive
technology; through courses on healthy computing; how technology
can help people with dyslexia; access to mobile phones; and courses on
specific technologies such as the Jaws and Thunder screen readers.

One year's access to all courses currently costs 100 pounds per user,
and single courses can be purchased for 25 pounds, with online
payment possible using PayPal. One or two courses, such as one on
making your computer talk in Windows, are free to access.

David Banes, acting Chief Executive of AbilityNet, said that since the
service went live at the beginning of June, just over 100 users had
signed up "from all sorts of backgrounds."

"There is interest from individuals with a disability in receiving
personal online support from a tutor since the cost of having someone
come in to train you is high," Banes told E-Access Bulletin.

As well as individuals, organisations such as schools and learning
centres have shown a strong interest in the site, he said. "They may
have a lot of assistive technology, but staff only use it infrequently. So
they may use us for Thunder refresher training, for example. They may
have had a half-day training in the past but need an update."

Future developments could include courses in languages other than
English, particularly if partners came forward to assist with translation,
Banes said.


+02: Guide Aims To Push Accessibility Up The IT Agenda.

A free, comprehensive guide published this month outlines steps IT
managers should take to ensure staff and service users with a disability
can access all internal and public facing technologies.

'The IT directors' guide to accessible IT,' aimed at the public and
private sectors, explains the needs of people with temporary and
permanent disabilities; and the steps that IT managers can take to move
accessibility higher up the corporate agenda. The guide also explains
how staff and the public can be assisted by technology and what
software, information and devices are available.

"This is the law," said report author and Publisher of Ability Magazine
John Lamb. "You can't recruit a disabled person if they cannot work in
your organisation."

On the other hand, some 50 per cent of disabled people in employment
whose work life could be improved by simple enhancements to
desktop systems struggle on unaided, says the guide. The need for IT
Managers to take action is strengthened by the fact some disabled staff
prefer not to describe themselves as such and consequently will not ask
their managers for "special treatment."

"It's not expensive - most adjustments that need to be made to make
IT systems accessible can be found in Windows," Lamb said.

The guide also highlights any major adjustments to IT systems to
enhance accessibility should be made at the earliest possible stage.
"The most important thing is to make systems accessible when
planning and designing systems," said Lamb. "And to convince people
to include accessibility in their checklist when they're [buying] a new
system. Then people can't say 'this is not a reasonable adjustment'
because it's too expensive.

"There is a lack of easily digestible information on accessibility.
Something was needed that isn't only for the tecchies," Lamb said.
Organisations that advised on the guide and are helping distribute it
are: the Government's Chief Information Officer (CIO) Council, the
Society of IT Management; National Computing Centre; British
Computer Society Elite Group and CIO Connect.

The guide was sponsored by Royal Mail in association with the
Information Technologists' Company. The guide can be downloaded
for free from:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/lamb1 .


+03: New Accessibility Guidelines Will Be More "Testable".

The long-awaited second version of Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines (WCAG), the global benchmarks of web accessibility, will
include far more detailed practical help for designers, a conference for
public sector web teams heard this month.

WCAG 1.0, the most recent set of guidelines from the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C), was released in 1999. WCAG 1.0 suggests
websites achieve one of three levels of accessibility from a minimum
of level A, to levels AA and AAA, by meeting several of its 14
"checkpoints."

But the forthcoming second version, WCAG 2.0, has been updated to
make checkpoints for accessibility more "testable," said W3C Web
Accessibility Initiative (WAI) Steering Council and WCAG working
group
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/waiabout )
member Alex Li, at this month's conference "Building the perfect
council website,"
( http://www.headstar-events.com/council07 )
hosted annually by E-Government Bulletin and the Society of IT
Management (Socitm).

"How do you know you've passed [colour contrast checkpoints]?" said
Li of WCAG 1.0. "Ask everyone with a colour deficit?" he said. To
address the issue, checkpoint 1.4.3 of the updated guidelines, for
example, will say text and images must have a contrast ratio of five to
one, said Li.

Senior web accessibility consultant at the RNIB, Donna Smillie,
agreed. "One of the nice things about WCAG 2.0 is criteria are much
more testable than was the case for many checkpoints with WCAG
1.0," said Smillie. "It'll be easier to standardise testing of many aspects
of the guidelines," she told delegates.

Other changes include two less checkpoints in WCAG 2.0 - there will
be 12 rather than 14 - but the three levels of attainable accessibility, A,
AA an AAA will remain in the second version.
Also, web 2.0 features such as interactive mapping, blogs and social
networking sites will be taken into consideration said Li. "The way we
use web content is very different [now]. As a result a lot of these things
need to be updated in WCAG 2.0," he told delegates.

"WCAG 1.0 is still sound. We're not changing its principles but we're
recognising changes in the web and updating them accordingly," said
Li. Details of all documents relating to the WCAG 2.0 working draft
are found at:
http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag20 .
The guidelines will be finally released by early 2008.

NOTE: Building the perfect council website is an annual UK event
hosted by E-Access Bulletin sister publication
E-Government Bulletin and the Society of IT Management (Socitm).
For more on this session on WCAG 2.0, see section three, this issue.



++News in Brief:


+04: Innovators Sought: Entrants are invited to enter a contest to find
the UK's best disabled entrepreneurs. The British Chamber of
Commerce, disability charity Leonard Cheshire and businessman Sir
Stelios Haji-Ioannou have launched the competition to find the person
who can show barriers placed in their way have not stopped them in
their quest for success. The winner will be rewarded with a cheque for
50,000 pounds:
http://www.leonard-cheshire.org/?lid=5087 .

+05: Face Up: One of the world's largest social networking websites is
to launch an alternative to security test captchas, inaccessible to vision
impaired users because they use images of text and numbers. Facebook
now allows vision impaired users to register their mobile phone
number to verify their identity when registering a user account to
receive a text message with a verification code. When the code is
entered, the user's identity is confirmed and such security tests
avoided:
http://www.facebook.com/ .

+06: Easy Read: A "View plain text" option link, enabling access to
the text layer of electronic books has been made available on
Accessible Google Book this month. The facility, on the Google
Accessible Search project, was launched by search engine company
Google allowing users of assistive technologies such as screen readers,
speech output and Braille display to read the available online books:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/googlebook1 .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: Underground Scene: Terry Robinson, of Describe Online writes
in response to Lynn Holdsworth's comments on the London
Underground guide in the Directory Enquiries site last issue: "I
understand this is based on the accessibility booklet which was
developed some time ago and, whilst it clearly states how many steps
there are and what's involved in moving through each station, it stops
short of telling you how to do it.

"The Describe Online service, on the other hand, tells you what the
station is like and how to use it. Sadly, at the time of writing, we don't
have guides to all stations, but hope we can provide this essential
service in due course.

"While explaining how to use the station, we also explain the
accessibility, or otherwise, of that station and recommend easiest
routes to, around and through it. Please visit:
http://www.describe-online.com
and follow the links to the National Rail and London Underground
pages. You'll note that we have a text map and station finder for each
network, plus a growing number of guides to stations. I hope this
helps."
[responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+08: Course Response: Phia Damsma from Sonokids, an international
organisation aimed at developing web based educational materials for
vision impaired people, writes in response to the following request
from the June issue: "Norman Waddington writes on behalf of an
acquaintance looking for a web design course suitable for a blind
person with additional disabilities."

Phia writes: "The information does not say if the acquaintance really
wants to do a course, or if he is just interested in creating his own
website. If the latter is the case, a free 'sonoplanet' website would be
ideal. It comes with a fully accessible web content management
system, which assists in the creation of a fully accessible website. Each
web account includes a guestbook, blog, photo album and poll. We
will gladly provide Norman's acquaintance with such a free website
account. The web address starts with
http://www.sonoplanet.com
and he should choose a name or word. Please let me know and I will
prepare an account.

And Jacob Kruger, AKA "Blind Biker" also responds. He writes:
"Although I'm not sure how accessible it would be to someone who has
no previous experience related to web design or layout, there is a very
good website with various tutorials related to web development and
design at:
http://www.w3schools.com .
The tutorials are freely available, and while somewhat technical, they
are pretty accessible using, for example, something like Jaws. I was a
web developer before becoming blind, and I have used this place to
remind myself about quite a lot of the details involved in web
development, design and layout.
[responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: CMS Enquiry: Simon Brasch, Database and Website Manager at
charity Help the Hospices writes: "Can you tell me anything you may
have heard of a Content Management System (CMS) called EasySite
by EIBS? They claim it has basic back-end and front-end accessibility
built in, and a company can choose to make these features mandatory.
Just wondering if you have come across them in your travels?"
[responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: Inaccessible PARIS: David Rosser from the Sensory Team
Torbay Care Trust writes: "I am visually impaired and use a piece of
software called PARIS at work on a daily basis but find it inaccessible
due to my limited vision even though I use Supernova (screen reader or
magnification).

"Is there anything I can do or is there any legislation around that could
assist me? Furthermore the company's website has recently been
redesigned but could be made more accessible as well.

"Do websites or software bought by local authorities have to be tested
before they are bought or undergo any test?"
[responses to inbox@headstar.com].


[Inbox ends].


++Section Two - Focus
- Accessibility Guidelines.

+11: Power To The New Generation
by Mel Poluck.

In terms of popular culture, the world has changed since 1999: pop
group the Spice Girls were at the peak of their fame; Bill Clinton was
President of the US Government; and we downloaded our music from
Napster for free. The internet has changed too, but at least it is still
relevant.

Alex Li, Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) Steering Council and Web
Content Working Group (WCAG) Working Group member, invited
delegates of this month's conference "Building the perfect council
website,"
( http://www.headstar-events.com/council07/ ),
in London, to look back to what was "hot" in 1999, the year that also
saw the release of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)
version 1.0.

The WCAG guidelines are now used across the globe to shape
inclusive website design and development to ensure accessibility to all
users with a disability and users of assistive technologies.  The
guidelines recommend that website developers comply with three
levels of accessibility ranging from level 'A' for minimum
accessibility; level 'AA' or the rarely achieved level 'AAA.' These
will remain in WCAG 2.0.

This second version, subject to several delays since its inception, is the
result of five years collaborative work between the WCAG working
group and individuals; researchers; disability organisations; people
with a disability; educational institutions; industry; web developers;
and government. The working draft can be seen at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/wcag2complete
and has many supporting documents to accompany it at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/wcag2intro .

Since WCAG was first conceived, the web has become a more
colourful place, with blossoming virtual worlds; countless blogs; social
networking sites and interactive digital maps. The second version, due
by the beginning of next year, has had to adapt accordingly. "The way
we use content is very different. Collaborative content such as
MySpace, YouTube and Google Maps are very rich in content," said
Li. "As a result a lot of these things needed to be updated in WCAG
2.0."

"One thing to ask yourself is what [web-based] interaction are we
doing?" Li asked the public sector delegates. " - Live traffic
information? Online education? Online tax payment? Blogging?
Podcasting? - these are all web 2.0 activities. If you are, you have to
look at WCAG 2.0. WCAG 1.0 would slow you down significantly,"
said Li. "WCAG 1.0 is still sound. We're not changing its principles
but we're recognising changes in the web and updating them
accordingly."

Not only has the web expanded greatly, but so has the choice of
assistive technologies people use to access it. "WCAG 2.0 is much
more flexible in terms of technology," said Li. "In Version 2.0,
everything is written in such a way that is technology neutral," he said.
He said in WCAG 2.0, for example, there is less emphasis on the use
of HTML and Cascading Style Sheets, used by web authors to define
document presentation and allow the same page to be rendered on-
screen, in print, by voice when read by a speech-based browser or
screen reader and on Braille-based, tactile devices.
Perhaps the most important change from WCAG 1.0 is that under each
guideline, there will be so-called "success criteria" describing what
must be achieved to conform to each guideline, similar to the
"checkpoints" of WCAG 1.0. Each success criterion is written as a
statement that will be either true or false when specific web content is
tested against it. As ever, while some can be tested by computer
programs, others must be tested by qualified human testers and
occasionally, a combination of those two may be used.
Donna Smillie, Senior Web Accessibility Consultant at the RNIB, said
changes to the guidelines would impact on the accessibility testing that
takes place at the charity, which tests and accredits websites as part of
one of its services. "From the point of view of the RNIB one of the
nice things about WCAG 2.0 is criteria are much more testable than
was the case for many checkpoints with WCAG 1.0," said Smillie.
"It'll be easier to standardise testing of many aspects of the
guidelines," she told delegates.


NOTE: 'Building the perfect council website' is an annual UK
event hosted by E-Access Bulletin sister publication
E-Government Bulletin and the Society of IT Management.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Multimedia Devices
- Q and A.

+12: Moving On Up
by Isaac Porat.

In February last year, E-Access Bulletin reported on development
plans for 'SpeakOn', a hardware device aimed at providing access to
selected news and entertainment audio web content without the need
for high IT skills. The project is being headed by assistive technology
charity a-technic
( http://www.a-technic.net ).
Planned content included DAISY-formatted books, MP3 music files,
internet radio stations, podcasts and other web site content including
online newspapers.

Since that time, the project has split into two elements: SpeakOn which
is a free software product, now available, that anyone can download
and run on their PC; and the original concept of a hardware box, now
codenamed 'Pipistrelle' and still in development. This month, E-Access
Bulletin interviews the creator and developer of SpeakOn, Isaac Porat,
and finds out exactly what is planned for this new technology.


Q: What is SpeakOn and what can it do?

A: SpeakOn is free, self-voicing software for finding, retrieving and
listening to media.

The E-Access Bulletin news item about SpeakOn in February 2006
talked mainly about a self-contained box, but we subsequently decided
to launch SpeakOn first as software for the PC. This software caters for
people who are comfortable with computers but are looking for an easy
and relaxing way to enjoy media.

SpeakOn was launched in June 2006 (almost exactly a year ago) and
has had a number of major upgrades since. It now covers pretty well all
specialized media services for blind people in the UK, as well as
general types of media such as internet radio and podcasts. Much work
has been done to improve the user interface for ease of use and more
features in handling general formats and media types have been added.

In its most recent feature release last month, support is provided to
browse and listen directly to the latest audio narrated streaming service
provided by the talking newspaper organisation
( TNAUK - http://www.tnauk.org.uk/ ).
It also closes some gaps in SpeakOn's media cover by handling CDs of
MP3 books such as those supplied by Calibre and support for audio
CDs. The album and track names are spoken to the user if available on
the internet repository. Although SpeakOn is free for use, it is not open
source. This is because we want to maintain control over its
development path.


Q: What first triggered the development of SpeakOn?

A: SpeakOn was born out of my own frustrations as a blind person in
finding, retrieving and playing media such as music, books,
newspapers and magazines using conventional PC access technology. I
was tired of memorising endless shortcut keys for different
applications and wanted a more relaxing way of listening to media
rather than having to sit upright in front of my computer. I started to
develop SpeakOn essentially for myself to address these issues.


Q: What unique features does SpeakOn offer that differentiate it from
other products and tools already on the market?

A: Currently, SpeakOn contains two applications; the first one, the
'Media Centre' covers a range of general purpose and special media
services for the blind. All these media can be accessed by conventional
means, but SpeakOn offers a uniform approach and therefore ease of
use and speed for finding, retrieving and playing the media it supports.

The second application includes a player for the popular 'Last.FM'
internet music service. The players available already for this service
are to my knowledge essentially not accessible for blind users.


Q: What has been most challenging about developing the SpeakOn
software?

A: SpeakOn is all about using the same interface, regardless of the
media used. In the real world, the various media are available in
different locations remotely and on the user's computer. These media
come in different text and audio formats, and a great challenge has
always been for the software to do as much work as possible 'under the
hood' so that to the user it all appears the same.


Q: How have you overcome these challenges?

A: I started with the basic interface model and a range of supported
media. Feedback from users started to arrive after the launch of
SpeakOn in late June 2006. There are a number of enthusiastic fans
who are prepared to stay in touch on a regular basis and test new
features of the program, giving advice and suggestions; this proved
invaluable and I am grateful to them.

Over the past year, the user interface has been gradually improved and
more features based on user feedback added. I realise that as SpeakOn
grows, more help will be needed from the community in providing
links to media resources, documentation and just spreading the word.


Q: How many people use SpeakOn?

A: There have been over 1,000 public downloads so far. Now that the
features and support for specialised media are generally complete, I
feel that SpeakOn is ready for a bigger audience.


Q: Is SpeakOn a type of screen reader?

A: Most blind people know about screen readers or magnifiers and
their use in a Windows-type system. Screen readers try to enable
access to conventional programs designed for sighted users with a
varying degree of success, depending on how the mainstream software
is written.

SpeakOn is different in its interface and approach in that it has no
visual interface.  It is designed from the ground up for input by a
limited number of keys and speech is built in for communicating with
the user. The interface is optimised for easy media access.

SpeakOn is not competing against screen readers as screen readers are
an essential tool for everyday use in accessing mainstream software.
SpeakOn just addresses a specific problem in providing a quick and
relaxing way to access media from the comfort of your armchair.
Because of its unconventional approach, it may not suit everybody.


Q: Can SpeakOn be used by organisations as well as by individuals?

A: The SpeakOn licence does not distinguish between use by
individuals or organisations, and any organisation is welcome to train
users to access media using SpeakOn if they wish.

We are currently collaborating with screenreader.net, the distributor of
the Thunder screen reader, to provide free computer access for the
broadest user-base possible. We recognise that we both are providing
products that complement each other.

We are also collaborating with organisations that provide specialized
online content, notably TNAUK and the Seeing Ear Library. Other
online content such as the Soundings magazine and ACB radio for
example can be accessed using SpeakOn with its standard interfaces.
DAISY and MP3 books distributed by various organisations can also
be easily played, and we are in discussion with various other
organisations in the UK and the US about possible further
developments and provision of content.


Q: What is planned for the future of SpeakOn?

A: SpeakOn so far has been aimed at people who are reasonably
comfortable using computers. This version of SpeakOn will always be
there and will be developed further to include more media and possibly
applications beyond media as well.

However, I am currently developing a version of SpeakOn specifically
for people who have limited knowledge of computers. This version
will be offered to the public in the next few months for the Windows
operating system.

It is recognised that some people will never use computers and to that
end we at a-technic would like to offer the 'easy' version of SpeakOn or
similar, operating in its own box. Together with my a-technic
colleagues, Chris Mairs and John Batty, I have started to work on this
project, codenamed Pipistrelle.  SpeakOn already runs under the Linux
operating system but more work needs to be done to make this a
practical proposition. Linux is free and can be tailored to do
specifically what SpeakOn requires for its functionality running on a
dedicated hardware.

In its own box, Pipistrelle like the existing SpeakOn software running
on a standard laptop, will communicate through WiFi and broadband,
using a simple numerical keypad or a similar device for input and will
connect to standard speakers and HiFi.

For this stage in the development, specific hardware will be required
and we will need to form partnerships with companies and
organisations that will help us by manufacturing, distributing and
supporting the product.


NOTE: For more information about SpeakOn and to download the
software and view the manual, see:
http://www.a-technic.net/speakon.htm .

Isaac Porat is a professor of materials science at the University of
Manchester. He is also a trustee of TNAUK and a-technic. SpeakOn
was developed as a labour of love in his spare time. Isaac can be
contacted at: speakon@a-technic.net .

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
