+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 90, JUNE 2007.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
BT Age and Disability Unit
( http://www.btplc.com/age_disability/ )
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk )

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Special Notice - Building the Perfect Council Website
- 12 July 2007.
- Olympia 2, London
http://headstar-events.com/council07/ .

Following the huge success of last year's conference, we present this
second annual event on how to create the perfect local authority
website: easy to use, compelling and engaging.

A partnership between Headstar and the local government Society of
IT Management (Socitm), the event will draw on the collected wisdom
of eight years of Socitm's annual 'Better Connected' review of all UK
council websites.

Speakers include Donna Smillie, Senior Web Accessibility Consultant,
RNIB; Dominic Tinley, Editor-In-Chief of the UK Parliament website
and Mary Reid, Mayor, Kingston upon Thames and Board Member,
ICELE. Interactive workshops will cover issues in detail including
usability, and the use of third party software. For details and to register
see:
http://headstar-events.com/council07/ .

[Special Notice ends].


++Issue 90 Contents.

++Section One: News.

01: Software 'Accessibility Passport' Gains Stamp Of Approval
- successful tests of evaluation scheme for educational tools.

02: EU Accessibility Laws Reach 'Critical Moment', Says MEP
- 2007 could see groundbreaking new policies.

03: Online Library Services Inspired By 'Amazon' Stores
- national plan for lending accessible books unveiled.

News in Brief: 04: Desktop Guides - free help with software; 05:
Creepy Castles - new accessible game; 06: News Talk - text to
podcast service; 07: Silver Radio - radio service rewarded.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Action Request - help with survey needed; 09: Programmer Power
- barriers to accessible websites; 10: Tube Stop - London
Underground network; 11: Design Course - teaching material sought.

Section Three: Focus - EU policy.
12: An Opportunity That Must Be Seized By EU Policymakers: This
year the European Commission and Parliament will draft three policies
that could bring boost efforts to make technology more accessible, says
Richard Howitt MEP. Derek Parkinson listened in.

Section Four: Focus - Second Life.
13: Outside The Gates Of Second Life: Virtual environments such as
Second Life have great potential as public spaces where people with
disabilities could enjoy freedoms denied to them offline. But only if
they can get past the accessibility hurdles, as Peter Verhoeven
explains.

[Contents ends].


Section One: News.


+01: Software 'Accessibility Passport' Gains Stamp Of Approval.

Successful trials have been completed of an "accessibility passport" for
educational software which provides far more detailed information
about a product than current accessibility standards, E-Access Bulletin
has learned.

Rather than simply stating that a product complies with a recognised
accessibility standard, the passport system would include a description
of what a product is and how it can be used, possibly including
assessments by teachers and developers.

A logo or kitemark could be used to indicate that a product has an
accessibility passport, but wouldn't necessarily specify all the detail it
contains, according to said Adrian Higginbotham, Accessibility
Content Manager at the British Educational Communications and
Technology Agency
( BECTA - http://www.becta.org.uk/ ).
Users could be directed to a central repository such as a website where
all this information is held, said Higginbotham.

In addition to Becta, the pilot also included Teachers Evaluating
Educational Multimedia
( TEEM - http://www.teem.org.uk/ ),
which provides independent assessment of products, and around 40
software developers, he said. The concept of the passport grew out of
work by TechDis, the government-funded agency for technology and
disability in education, said Higginbotham.

The passport proposal reflects growing interest in the concept of the
"flexibility" of a product, as distinct from its accessibility. Flexibility
reflects how a product can be adjusted to meet a specific need, rather
than the typical standards-based approach, which tests compliance with
rigidly defined criteria. "It's early, we're only just starting to ask
ourselves questions about flexibility," Higginbotham told delegates at
E-Access '07, a conference organised by Headstar, publisher of E-
Access Bulletin.

People interested in the accessibility passport idea and want to make
suggestions, receive more information, or participate in further trials
should contact John Sewell, Senior Advisor with TechDis at
john@techdis.ac.uk .


+02: EU Accessibility Laws Reach "Critical Moment", Says MEP.

The EU is set to step up its activities to ensure digital technologies are
more accessible to citizens with disabilities, according to MEP Richard
Howitt, president of the European Parliament's All-Party Disability
Intergroup.

By the end of the year, the European Commission will publish three
key pieces of legislation, Howitt told delegates at E-Access '07, the
annual conference organised by Headstar, publisher of E-Access
Bulletin. This summer, a new framework policy will be published
under the inclusion strand of the EU's 'i2010' information society
action plan that is expected to shift accessibility requirements more in
favour of the end user, he said.

Until now, EU policy on accessibility has focused more on providers
of content and services rather than end users, said Howitt. "It doesn't
make sense if content is accessible, but terminals are not," he said.
"2007 is a critical moment in the EU in terms of addressing access to
technology," said Howitt.

In addition a new communication on digital inclusion will be published
by the Commission, and a revised anti-discrimination directive is due
by the end of the year, Howitt told delegates. These new EU policies
will tighten up the requirements on private sector suppliers, possibly
including a new certification scheme for accessibility; and widen the
accessibility requirements on public sector procurement, Howitt told
delegates.

However, we must not be complacent, said Howitt. He urged delegates
and readers to show public support for improved EU anti-
discrimination law by signing up to an online petition organised by the
European Disability Forum:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/edf1 .

During the final keynote session, Dr Paul Timmers, head of the
eInclusion Unit at the European Commission also invited public
participation. To be effective, EU policy must be effective and
efficient, complete and coherent, future-proof and technology-neutral,
he said. "We're going through an assessment of all these issues now,"
said Dr Paul Timmers, head of the eInclusion Unit at the European
Commission. "I invite everybody to get involved in the discussion," he
said. A dedicated website has been set up for this purpose, he said:
http://www.ipolicy.eu/

NOTE: For a full report on Mr Howitt's speech to e-Access '07 see
Section Three, this issue.


+03: Online Library Services Inspired By 'Amazon' Stores.

Ordering accessible books held by public libraries and charities such as
the RNIB could become as simple as the "one-click" services offered
by online bookstores such as Amazon, according to plans being co-
ordinated by the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council, E-Access
Bulletin has learned.

The vision of a simpler way to order accessible library books is being
explored as part of a plan to integrate catalogues from the RNIB and
the former National Library for the Blind (NLB) with new search
facilities for public libraries, according to Sarah Wilkie, Programme
Manager at the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council
( MLA - http://www.mla.gov.uk/ ).

"At this stage it is still a vision, but we think that ordering a library
book should become more like using a service like Amazon," Wilkie
told E-Access Bulletin. "We think there would be interest in a range of
services. A library user could be offered a range of options such as
having it delivered to a local library, or possibly direct to their home
for a fee. They may also be offered the opportunity to buy a book," she
said.

The first big milestone on the way to achieving this will come in early
2008 when UnityUK, an online catalogue system for public lending
libraries, is relaunched on a new technology platform that is more
accessible than used at present. "It will be machine-readable, and
compatible with screen readers. It will also have clear fonts,
magnification features, and alternative text where necessary," said
Wilkie.

Between now and then a significant amount of work also needs to be
done on the content of the UnityUK, Wilkie said. "At the moment,
records just say if a title is accessible but don't say how specifically -
whether it's an audio book, large print, or Braille," for example," she
said. In addition, library services managed by RNIB, including
Revealweb, a service originally launched by the former NLB, will be
integrated into one system. RNIB took over the running of all NLB
services at the end of 2006.


++News in Brief:

+04: Desktop Guides: Free guides for using JAWS and screen
magnification software with applications such as Audacity and
Windows Media Player 11 are now available at the VIP Software
Guides website. The software guides were written by Chorlton
Workshop as part of computer classes held at Henshaws Society For
Blind People:
http://vip.chowo.co.uk/ .

+05: Creepy Castles: PCS Games, who claim to "make games that
tickle your ears," have released 'Sarah and the Castle of Witchcraft and
Wizardry', a new accessible game inspired by the books of JK
Rowling. The game transports players into a world of fantasy filled
with secret passageways and hidden chambers. You are challenged to
explore the castle searching for magical items and fighting
creepy creatures. More information is available at:
http://www.pcsgames.net .

+06: News Talk: Seattle-based speech technology company
AudioDizer has launched a product that converts text from news
websites into high quality podcasts. According to the company,
AudioDizer converts text into MP3 files that can be read by male or
female voices that sound similar to radio broadcasts. Apparently, it can
deliver a variety of accents so that if a story originates from India, an
Indian voice reads it, or if it comes from the UK, a British voice is
used:
http://www.audiodizer.com/ .

+07: Silver Radio: Insight Radio, formerly known as VIPonair, has
scooped the Silver prize at the national Sony Radio Academy Awards
for the category of best Internet programme. Insight Radio broadcasts
to blind and partially sighted people across the UK and overseas. As
well as broadcasting online, the station broadcasts to Glasgow and the
surrounding areas on 101 FM:
http://www.insightradio.co.uk .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Abuse Action: Action for Blind People is currently looking into
the issues of verbal and physical abuse towards blind and partially
sighted people and would welcome your opinions on this subject.
Readers are invited to take a few minutes to fill out the website survey:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/action1 .
And if you have any comments or questions about the survey, please
contact Debbie Flatley on 0207 635 4921 or email:
debbie.flatley@actionforblindpeople.org.uk .


+09: Programmer Power: Tedd Sperling has some thoughts to offer
about our recent feature article 'Overcoming The Barriers To
Accessible Websites,' published in the May edition of E-Access
Bulletin. Tedd writes: "Your article and comments are right on the
mark. We do need to convince senior management of the need for
accessibility in web sites. However, there is an additional aspect to
consider, and that is educating programmers as to "best" practices.

I am often employed as a programmer by companies to design,
develop, and make functional web sites and applications. In doing so, I
quietly add accessibility as best I can. Often, I find that there is no
additional work that must be conducted to make a site accessible and
meet the client's needs at the same time. In fact, my most recent
client's needs were met more efficiently by providing an element of
accessibility.

Certainly, there are new cool things that catch their eye, but it is a
challenge to meet the new thing with an accessible solution.
Sometimes, it works and sometimes it doesn't. But the point is that I
don't belabor the client with accessibility concerns, I just deal with
them and the more I know about accessibility needs, the better I can
change my way of doing things to accommodate both accessibility and
client needs without degrading either.

So, as I see it, the more educated the programmer is to accessibility
concerns, the better."
[Further responses please to: inbox@headstar.com]


+10: Tube Stop: A website providing details of facilities for disabled
people at stations on the London Underground network, available at
Direct Enquiries
( http://www.directenquiries.com/ ),
is of limited value to vision impaired travellers, writes Lynn
Holdsworth.

"Whoever came up with the idea of the London Underground guide
was thinking along the right lines, but as a guide dog user who would
have liked "turn left after going through the ticket gates" type
directions, and specific information about alternatives to escalators, it
didn't give me the information I was looking for," she says.
[Responses please to: inbox@headstar.com]


+11: Design Course: Norman Waddington writes on behalf of an
acquaintance looking for a web design course suitable for a blind
person with additional disabilities. Norman writes: "He is looking for a
suitable course for web page design which would be accessible to him
using a screen reader.  He has nearly got his proficiency back with
Braille reading but any additional material I am sure would be an
advantage to him."
[Responses please to: inbox@headstar.com]

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three: Focus
- EU Policy.

+12: An Opportunity That Must Be Seized
by Derek Parkinson.

"When people hear the word 'Directive' their eyes tend to glaze over,"
admitted Richard Howitt MEP, a leading campaigner for disability
rights in the European Parliament. "Too often, decisions made in
Brussels can seem remote," he told delegates at E-Access '07, the
annual conference organised by Headstar, publisher of E-Access
Bulletin.

In fact, policy at an EU level has helped to bring about real changes,
ensuring that the benefits of new technologies are made available to
all, said Howitt, who is president of the All-Party Disability Intergroup,
the main campaign group for disability issues in the European
Parliament. "Technology should be a beacon of hope," he said.
However, all too often, advances in technology place more barriers in
the way of people with disabilities, he said.

EU policies aimed at these issues include the 2002 framework policy
on electronic communications
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/2002 ),
which paved the way for increased awareness of accessibility among
private sector suppliers, he said. Since 2004, the EU directive on public
procurement
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/2004 )
has helped to ensure that accessibility is taken into account when
public money is spent on IT, he said.

Two years later, in 2006, changes were made to EU policy on
structural funds and research
( http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/home_en.html ),
ensuring that accessibility is a higher priority, he said. "Forty per cent
of the EU budget is now covered by some form of anti-discrimination
legislation," said Howitt.

The momentum is set to increase in the near future, particularly with a
new policy on digital TV in place since the end of 2006, a new
framework policy and a communication on digital inclusion due in the
summer of 2007, and a revised anti-discrimination directive due by the
end of the year, he said. The Audio Visual Media Services Directive
(AVMS), adopted in 2006, is a significant move towards widening
disabled access to TV, said Howitt. "Since the 1970s there has been
voluntary commitment to this, but it is now a requirement to have
specific quotas, and to report progress," he said.

In many countries voluntary commitments don't appear to be working,
he said. "About 0.7 per cent of programmes in Germany are audio-
described, it is around one film per week in Portugal, and one film per
month in France," he told delegates.

Howitt hopes that the communication on digital inclusion, due this
summer, will include proposals for a certification scheme for digital
technologies, and that requirements for accessibility in public
procurement will be strengthened. There are two main hurdles for
accessibility campaigners, he said. Many of the recommendations
about digital inclusion contained in EU policies such as i2010
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/i2010 )
are optional, not mandatory, said Howitt. In addition, accessibility is
treated as a social or market-related issue, rather than an access issue.
"It doesn't make sense if content is accessible, but terminals are not.
That amounts to a policy failure," he said.

In the final keynote for the day, Dr Paul Timmers, head of the
eInclusion Unit at the European Commission, agreed that a market-
based approach will not solve all our problems, although it will make
an important contribution. "There is a digital opportunity as well as a
divide. With an aging population there is an opportunity to make e-
accessibility mainstream. But there will always be some things that
markets cannot address or solve," he said.

Part of the problem with new technologies is that they don't always fit
well into the overall structure of EU policy, said Timmers. The
economy, or social cohesion and quality of life issues are the main
drivers for EU policy, and access to technology often gets split
between several policy areas. "The outcome is that issues such as web
accessibility aren't covered at the European level," he said.

Broadly there are three separate challenges for EU policy on access to
technology, he said. To be effective and efficient, anti-discrimination
law must be tested and refined by case law, but this can be a slow,
piecemeal process. EU policy should be complete and coherent, but
there is a danger that the public sector will leave the private sector
lagging behind. Finally, EU policy should be future-proof and
technology-neutral, and achieving this requires regular updates, said
Timmers.

"We're going through an assessment of all these issues now," said
Timmers. "I invite everybody to get involved in the discussion," he
said. A dedicated website has been set up for this purpose, he said:
http://www.ipolicy.eu/


[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Focus
- Second Life.

+13: Outside The Gates Of Second Life
by Peter Verhoeven.

Is a virtual world a venue for entertainment, a game, or a public place
to meet others? Should it be accessible to everyone? Why doesn't any
screen reader or screen magnifier let you access Second Life?

Second Life is a 3-D virtual world entirely built and owned by its
residents. Since opening to the public in 2003, it has grown explosively
and today has wet up accounts set up for more than 5 million people
around the world. I am one of those 5 million people and never could
log in, because of Second Life's lack of accessibility. Most of those 5
million accounts are never used.

On the subject of accessibility, Joshua Linden from Linden Labs, one
of the folks who help create the Second Life platform, has written:
"The world, of course, is created by the residents. We are deeply
committed to making Second Life usable by everyone. A large number
of Second Life residents have 'First Life' disabilities and enjoy the
freedoms that a virtual world offers from communication to movement.
However, we're still a very small company and have limited
development resources, so we have not been able to do everything we
want to yet!"

I think that it is very difficult to make the current client viewer of
Second Life accessible. With my free Desktopzoom magnifier, I could
magnify the login screen, enter my log in name and password, but after
logging in, magnification was turned off and I couldn't bring it up
again.

If you launch the Second Life viewer with a screen magnifier such as
ZoomText, Lunar or iZoom, magnification will be turned off. If you
access the Second Life viewer with a screen reader like Hal, Jaws or
Window-Eyes, nothing will be spoken aloud, and nothing will appear
on your Braille line.

A programmer at Desktopzoom
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/desk1 )
told me that the Second Life viewer and Desktopzoom conflict with
each other. That is the reason you see the flickering of the login screen
in Second Life client viewer, while running Desktopzoom.

Linden Labs has made the Second Life client viewer open source. This
means that it is at least possible to program other interfaces that
integrate with Second Life. You can for example think about a virtual
world with more sound instead of 3-D effects or speech support and
audio description of 3-D effects.

Dolphin Computer Access
(http://www.yourdolphin.com/)
has also highlighted the inaccessibility of Second Life. A spokesperson
said: "Unfortunately Second Life will not work with [Dolphin's screen
reader and magnifier] Supernova at this time. The problem that you
face with trying to run Second Life with magnification software is that
the game will call up the extended functions of the video card.

"In order to create magnification, the Dolphin software intercepts
information passing to the video card. While under normal conditions
this poses no problem, the extended functions of the video card being
called by the game cannot get intercepted and therefore will not be
magnified.If the situation with Second Life changes I will let you
know, as I know a number of clients who have enquired about this."
Sometimes I have the impression that every day there are more articles
written about Second Life, than there are visitors. But all this makes
me curious and I cannot wait until an accessible client becomes
available!

NOTE: Peter Verhoeven provides an online resource containing
guidance and advice about magnifier technology at:
http://www.magnifiers.org/
[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
