+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 87, MARCH 2007.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by:
RNIB
( http://www.rnib.org.uk )
BT Age and Disability Unit
( http://www.btplc.com/age_disability/ )
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk )

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


- e-Access '07: Technology for All
-2 May 2007
- New Connaught Rooms, London
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess07/ .

E-Access Bulletin's third annual conference and exhibition on access to
technology by people with disabilities is a high-level event drawing
together all the strands needed for modern public and private sector
organisations to draw up progressive policies on accessibility.

Speakers include: Richard Howitt MEP, President of the European
Parliament's All-Party Disability Intergroup; Geoff Adams-Spink,
BBC Disability Correspondent; and Paul Timmers, Head of ICT at the
European Commission's Inclusion Unit and panellists from RNIB and
University of Southampton.

Supported by Ability Magazine, the RNID and the RNIB, the
conference is aimed at public sector bodies, technology suppliers,
educational institutions, banks, private sector providers of goods or
services, individuals with a disability and organisations providing at
least some of your information or services digitally.

For more information and to register visit:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess07/
And for sponsorship and exhibition opportunities please contact Claire
Clinton on 01273 231291 or by email at:
claire@headstar.com

[Special notice ends].


++Issue 87 Contents.

++Section One: News.

01: Assistive Products Gear Up Fast For Windows Vista
- specialist technology firms respond to operating system upgrade.

02: Users Flock to Free Document Conversion Service
- alternative formats returned by email within minutes.

03: Reality Gap Widens For Councils' Web Accessibility Claims.
- says annual survey of UK council websites.

04: 'World's First' Free, Accessible IT Training Course Goes Live.
- computer maintenance and networking e-learning launch.

News in Brief: 05: Signature Campaign - online disability rights
petition; 06: Thrilling Mission - free shooter game; 07: All Aboard -
London bus trial results.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Code Captcha - accessible anti-spam tool; 09: Open Advice -
response to open source software question; 10: HAL Gremlins - screen
reader advice sought.

Section Three: Focus - The Law
11: A Career Ladder With Broken Rungs, Part Two: Sam Latif was
chosen by her employers to study for her industry's 'gold standard'
qualification, but the training was fraught with obstacles to blind
students and a legal battle has since ensued. Derek Parkinson reports
on her experiences of bringing this landmark case to court.

Section Four: Focus: Focus - Digital creativity.
12: Image Crisis: Kevin Carey writes on the importance of maintaining
creativity and uniqueness when devising accessible Web 2.0 features
and websites.

[Contents ends].


Section One: News.

+01: Assistive Products Gear Up Fast For Windows Vista.

Assistive technology manufacturers have responded more quickly to
create versions of their products compatible with Microsoft's latest
operating system Vista than with previous releases of Windows, E-
Access Bulletin has learned.

Some assistive technology companies were ready with public beta
versions of their products by the time that Microsoft released Vista to
the retail market at the end of January.

"The assistive technology vendors have responded very quickly in
bringing out updates to their software," RNIB regional technical
officer Andy White told E-Access Bulletin. "Microsoft has designed
Vista with assistive technology software in mind." Previously
companies had to work harder to make their software work with
Microsoft operating systems. "Every time a new one came out, they
had to chase their tails to keep up," White said.

However Eric Damery, Vice President of Product Management
Software at Freedom Scientific, developer of popular JAWS screen
reader, told E-Access Bulletin the development process has not been
simple. "We have to develop, test and support customers in so many
different configurations, the challenges tend to be very high," said
Damery. "Vista comes along and changes the technique we have used
for capturing the screen data," said Damery. "We are forced to
implement and test a new solution, without breaking the old.

"One of the biggest challenges was that [Vista] was a moving target for
the last three years. It was not until the last six to nine months that we
truly understood how Microsoft would expose the information."
Freedom Scientific made their new version of JAWS available "within
30 days of the release of Vista," said Damery.

Of the popular assistive technologies for vision impaired people,
compatible versions of the screen reader Thunder and magnifier
Lightning from the non-profit software provider screenreader.net
( http://www.screenreader.net/ )
and screen reader Window-Eyes version 6.1 from US-based GW Micro
were released to coincide with the Vista launch.

A Vista-compatible version of magnifier ZoomText from US company
AiSquared was released two weeks after Vista's launch, and UK-based
Dolphin, the assistive technology company that makes products for
vision impaired people, has not yet launched its Vista-compatible
version '8.1' of Supernova, a screen reader and magnifier with Braille
support; Hal, a screen reader; and magnifiers Lunar and LunarPlus.
Dolphin told E-Access Bulletin these will go on the market in April or
May, with recent purchasers entitled to a free upgrade.

NOTE: To comment on this story or the issues it raises, please visit
E-Access Bulletin Live at:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .


+02: Users Flock to Free Document Conversion Service.

A free service allowing people to convert documents automatically to
and from Braille and synthetic speech, accessed by email, is receiving
some 15,000 to 20,000 new requests per month, E-Access Bulletin has
learned.

The 'RoboBraille'
( http://www.robobraille.org/ )
Service, funded with 560,000 pounds from the European Commission,
is run by an international consortium led by the Danish national body
for young people and children with impaired vision, 'Organisation
Synscenter Refsnaes'.

Users, who do not need to register, send in documents as email
attachments in Word, rich text, html or plain text formats. A specialist
piece of software translates the documents into contracted Braille or
mp3 files in up to five languages. Documents are returned
electronically and must then be rendered on a Braille embosser or
displayed on a Braille display, where a Braille format is requested.

"We do not register users but expect to have a core user group of more
than 1,000 people at present," RoboBraille co-ordinator Lars Ballieu
Christensen told E-Access Bulletin. Languages currently handled are
Danish; English; Greek; Italian; and Portuguese. The team also plans to
add French, Lithuanian and Norwegian.

"RoboBraille was the logical next step after having developed Braille
translation software for decades that users found very difficult to use,"
said Christensen. "With RoboBraille we are capable of automating
processes that are otherwise rather complicated and at the same time
maintain a system that is always up-to-date with the latest fixes."

The development consortium comprises The Royal National College
for the Blind in the UK, the Associazone Nazionale Subvedenti in
Italy, the National Council for the Blind of Ireland in Ireland, the
National Association of Housing for the Visually Impaired in Ireland,
Pagkypria Organozi Tyflon in Cyprus and the Centro de Inovacao para
Deficientes (CIDEF) in Portugal.

The team plans to expand the service, enabling users to convert
documents to DAISY books, Braille maths and Braille music; and
introduce a service for banks and tax offices to send electronic
documents to print-impaired customers.

NOTE: To comment on this story or the issues it raises, please visit
E-Access Bulletin Live at:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive .


+03: Reality Gap Widens For Councils' Web Accessibility Claims.

The gap between claims about website accessibility made by UK local
authorities and the true picture of accessibility has widened since last
year, a new report finds.

The annual 'Better Connected' review of council sites from the local
government Society of IT Management (Socitm) found that this year
some 29 per cent of councils are incorrectly claiming level 'A,' 'AA'
or 'AAA' accessibility, up from 22 per cent of councils last year.

Claims are usually made by a site displaying the relevant official logo
of the international World Wide Web Consortium's Web Accessibility
Initiative. Socitm commissions the blindness charity RNIB to
independently check the claims, including manual tests which are more
rigorous than the purely automated tests on which councils and their
technology partners often rely.

"That gap between claim and reality must reflect a lack of awareness,"
said Martin Greenwood, head of Socitm's Insight Programme. "People
are either doing it deliberately - and I'd like to think they're not - or
they are prepared to believe what a third party supplier tells them."

Additionally, just 71 out of a total of 468 UK councils' web sites meet
basic level 'A' web accessibility requirements, the survey finds,
despite the fact the UK government specifies level 'AA' as a baseline.

"The fact that 27 sites have not even achieved level 'A' yet have
claimed level AAA (the highest level). . . suggests some basic
ignorance about the task in hand," the report says. To improve the
situation, Socitm suggests councils aim to take a long-term view of
accessibility and to "realise the scale of task in achieving level A
standard."


+04: 'World's First' Free, Accessible IT Training Course Goes Live.

What is claimed to be the world's first free, accessible, online learning
programme teaching people the basics of computer maintenance and
networking has been launched in Australia. The course is open for
anyone to apply, from anywhere in the world.

The course runs for two days per week over a one year period.
Students learn the fundamentals of computer operating systems and
network infrastructure, learning how to build a computer and install
different versions of the Microsoft Windows operating system; how to
maintain and use networking equipment; and how to install and run
medium to large-sized networks. The course is endorsed by networking
infrastructure company Cisco.

According to Iain Murray, course co-ordinator at the Curtin University
of Technology in Western Australia, all of the content is accessible to a
person with an internet connection and assistive equipment such as a
screen reader or text magnifier. "We have made notes for JAWS users
on accessing the online material but it works just as well with other
products including VoiceOver on Apple machines," Murray told
E-Access Bulletin. Live lectures are delivered using the 'Skype'
internet telephone service, which has negligible cost, he said.

According to Murray, graphs, diagrams and mathematical notation
have been made accessible. "The course is not overly mathematical but
does include a significant amount of binary and hexadecimal
conversions. For this we have developed a 'peg board'. It's a very
simple device that consists of a piece of wood or plastic with three
rows of 32 holes in it. This also allows the calculation of IP addresses
and subnets. We ask that students attempt to get one of these made
locally, but if that is not possible we ship one to them, at no charge,"
said Murray.

Prospective students can find out more by emailing Iain Murray on:
i.murray@ece.curtin.edu.au .


++News in Brief:

+05: Signature Campaign: An online petition calling for tougher
European legislation on disability rights is aiming to collect over 1
million signatures from European citizens. The petition, from the
European Disability Forum, is open until 3 October, after which it will
be handed to the European Union and the European Parliament. If the
target is met, the European Union is obliged to respond:
http://www.1million4disability.eu/ .

+06: Thrilling Mission: A free science fiction "shooter" audiogame for
vision-impaired gamers has been launched for free online. Players
control a character who is attacked by eight types of robot, on six game
levels, with nine weapons at his disposal. The mission: to save a group
of kidnapped scientists in a booby-trapped building. Technoshock has
been developed by Russian accessible game developers Tiflocomp.ru:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/techno1 .

+07: All Aboard: Just 28 per cent of London bus passengers found a
trial of Transport for London's on board 'next stop' digital signs and
audio announcements useful for the journey they were making, new
research finds. User groups comprised people with and without
disabilities, schoolchildren and non-English speakers. Suggested
improvements to the service, which will be launched across the capital
next year, include adjusting the timing of announcements:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/tfl2 .

[Section One ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Thunder screen reader
- from screenreader.net CIC, a not-for-profit company.

Thunder is software that makes a modern computer talk. It is
absolutely free for personal use at home. Download from:
http://www.screenreader.net
and enjoy.

Since its launch at the end of July 2006, there have been 10,000
downloads and we now have several commercial versions of Thunder
available to organisations including Thunder on a memory stick and
competitively priced licensing arrangements for colleges and
universities.

We sell magnification software for partially sighted people and
ClaroRead which has been designed for students with Dyslexia.

Email us at: ask@screenreader.net
or call: 01733 234441 for further information.

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Code Captcha: Tedd Sperling from Australia has created an audio
'Captcha' tool, an accessible version of the security tools used on
many websites that ask people to type in a displayed code, to prevent
access by 'robot' spammer software. The accessible system speaks the
code out loud. Sperling invites readers to test it at:
http://www.sperling.com/examples/captcha/ .
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+09: Open Advice: In our last issue David Bates asked: "Will files
produced with open source software be accessible to users who do not
have the appropriate operating system installed on their computers?"

David O'Brien responds: "It shouldn't matter what programme you use
to create [a] website: as long as the HTML is written properly, JAWS
should have no problem interpreting it. The 'universal translator' you
mention already exists - it is valid, well-structured HTML.

"Web accessibility standards are set down by the Web Accessibility
Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).

"The general idea is that web content created by an author who
conforms to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) using
an authoring tool that conforms to Authoring Tool Accessibility
Guidelines (ATAG) which is read by a user agent that conforms to
User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG) will be as widely
accessible as it's possible to make it. You can find out more about the
W3C's Web Accessibility Initiative at:
http://www.w3.org/WAI/
but it does get a bit technical. The Web Standards Project (WASP) has
a good summary of the case for standards at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/wasp1 .

"Unfortunately, very little web content is [accessible]. There are no
authoring tools I know of that are fully ATAG conformant. Sloppy
web design is rife, so most web pages fail even the most rudimentary
level of WCAG. And user agents vary widely in their support for
UAAG. Firefox is generally held to be pretty much standards
compliant. Internet Explorer (IE) 5 and 6 had very poor compliance.
The general picture with user agents is very much improved.

"I would also urge you to join the (often lively!) debates at
accessifyforum.com if you'd like to know more."

And Sue Buckley writes with a link to a story in 'Computerworld' with
news of software from Sun Microsystems that will translate between
the file format in Microsoft Office 2003 suite and the open source
OpenDocument Format:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/trans4 .
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].


+10: Hal Gremlins: Angela Owen from Bradford writes: "I have been
using Version 5 of the Hal Screen Reader [from Dolphin Computer
Access], mostly with Microsoft Word and Outlook, for many years
with very few problems. When Versions 6 and 7 became available, I
tried upgrading to both of these but, unfortunately, have been forced to
revert to Version 5 due to experiencing various problems.

"These include increasingly slow running of the speech as a document
lengthens, causing words to be missed or spoken incorrectly while
typing; incorrect speaking of, or failure to read, selected objects, such
as input fields in Word; reduced choice of voices and no setting for
speech intonation, these being available in Version 5.

"I have discussed these issues with Dolphin several times, but we seem
unable to progress the matter. I have tried their suggestion of switching
to the "No Dom" MAP file in Word 2000, but this makes no
difference. I wonder if anyone else has experienced similar problems
and has any tips to share?"
[Responses please to inbox@headstar.com ].

[Inbox ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Disabled Living Foundation
http://www.dlf.org.uk .

DLF provides free, impartial advice about all types of products for
older and disabled people. From stairlifts to walk-in baths, jar openers
to tap turners, bath seats to walking sticks, wheelchairs to scooters,
hoists to beds, the DLF can help you find solutions that enable you to
stay active and independent.

We also offer free, impartial search and comparison website for walk-
in baths, bath seats, showers, grab rails and other personal care
products for older and disabled people. See: 'Bathing made easy' at:
http://www.dlf.org.uk/bathing.

Helpline: 0845 130 9177 (Mon-Fri, 10am - 4pm)
Textphone: 020 7432 8009
Email: advice@dlf.org.uk .

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Three: Focus
- The Law.

+11: A Career Ladder With Broken Rungs, Part Two
by Derek Parkinson.

A courtroom can seem a daunting place, especially if you are taking on
one of the largest law firms in the world. But this didn't stop IT
manager Sam Latif setting out to establish how UK anti-discrimination
law applies to electronic content.

Her journey to court began when she signed up for a distance learning
course that prepared her for the 'Project Management Professional'
qualification, awarded by the Project Management Institute (PMI), a
not for profit organisation based in Baltimore, USA.

Soon after beginning the course in September 2004, Latif became
frustrated with her struggle to obtain course material in an accessible
electronic format from PMI, and the difficulties continued right up to
the final examination, a year later. Although she went on to pass the
exam, Latif decided early on to take legal action on the grounds that
PMI infringed her rights under the Disability Discrimination Act (see
E-Access Bulletin, February 2007).

Her first move was to seek advice from the Disability Rights
Commission (DRC), a route that brought her up against new hurdles.
"It was initially quite difficult to deal with the DRC. You get told to
look at the DRC website for guidance, and when you ring up you get a
different person and have to explain the situation again," she says.
After a few weeks of persistent phoning, however, Latif was assigned a
DRC case worker, and started to get to grips with the paperwork
necessary for her legal case to proceed at an Employment Tribunal.

At this stage, although the DRC was providing assistance it hadn't
formally backed her case, but Latif was already determined to press
ahead. "I decided I was just going to do it by myself if I had to, but it
was a lot more complicated than I thought" she tells E-Access Bulletin.
"Towards the hearing the DRC decided to officially support me and
helped me find a barrister, Paul Epstein, who has been brilliant," she
says.

Like most people who aren't legal professionals, the formalities of
court business were new to Latif. In works of fiction, court cases often
take the form of a dramatic showdown between opponents, but like
many cases in real life, hers was dealt with over a number of hearings
and many months. Nevertheless there was a theatrical aspect to it, she
says. "The first hearing was interesting because it was new to me and
helped me understand what a barrister does. In some ways it was like a
performance," Latif says. This hearing set out some of the basic
aspects, such as whether the DDA applied to the case.

It wasn't until the second hearing that Latif was able to speak on her
own behalf. She was the first to be cross-examined that day, but didn't
realise that this would be her only chance to speak. "I didn't really
understand the etiquette," she says. "It was really painful to have to sit
and listen while people said things that I disagreed with," she says.
However, her ability to touch-type proved to be valuable, as she was
able to take notes and talk through the important points later with her
barrister.

One aspect of the case that she was unprepared for was the PMI's
strategy of calling in accessibility experts to support its own case.
"That was one of the worst experiences, the one that hurt me the most,"
says Latif of the moment when Robin Christopherson, head of
accessibility services at the widely respected charity AbilityNet, gave
evidence in support of PMI.

After the hearings came to an end in June 2006, there was a long wait
for the final verdict, which was delivered at the end of October. Instead
of being delivered in a hushed courtroom, the news came via a simple
email in her inbox. And the story doesn't end there: PMI has since
decided to appeal against the verdict, a process that is likely to take
another couple of months at least before it is resolved.

Looking back on her experience so far, Latif thinks she underestimated
the impact that the case would have on her life. "There were certain
times when it was very hard. My husband was probably the only one
who understood this, because only he could see me studying so hard,
and also preparing for the case," she says. But overall, Latif doesn't
regret taking this route. "People don't normally bother. But unless they
do, disabled people will be ignored," she says.

[Section Three ends].


++Sponsored Notice: Describe Online - Bringing Customers to You!
- Providing Online Text Guides to Public Venues.

Our mission is that every public venue shall have a text guide which
explains that it exists; where it is; how to get there via public transport;
what's on offer and how to obtain and use it.

Our accessible website at:
http://www.describe-online.com
contains models of guides to a wide range of transport, civic,
commercial and other venues. Our guides complement emerging
technologies such as GPS and GIS systems.

Bring more customers to your venues through our service.
Contact us on: 0141 423 2683 or:
terry@describe-online.com .

[Sponsored Notice ends]


++Section Four: Focus
- Digital creativity.

+12: Image Crisis
by Kevin Carey.

In November 2006 I wrote a piece about Web 2.0 and the challenges it
poses for people with impaired vision; and in other places I have
written about the need for us to focus on content creation as well as
consumption.

The important thing about Web 2.0 will not be the millions of people
who go on and on about nothing but the few who are distinctive. To be
distinctive, however, means knowing a great deal about sameness and
difference; and I think this will pose a challenge both for blind and
visually impaired people and those who work with them. I am not
thinking here about text-only blogs but about the challenges of self-
expression in a multi media context.

This is a tricky and almost completely unexplored area.

There is an important distinction to be made at the outset between
buying and making. Just as we buy clothes, furniture, glassware, pets,
cars, food and entertainment as part of our self-identity, as a way of
saying who we are, so we can also do this on the internet in virtual
spaces like 'Second Life'.

In such spaces you can construct either a true-to-life or fantasy identity
for yourself and live a parallel, virtual life. As in real (analogue or
'skin'), life, however, everything you do in a style obsessed world sends
signals; so you can't afford accidents. There is a world of difference
between wearing red trainers, blue jeans, a West African multi
coloured top and a black velvet tail coat at a formal dinner party as a
social and fashion statement and wearing this motley collection by
accident thereby being mistaken for a highly self-conscious, rebellious
poser instead of simply being careless or too lazy to bother.

The area of colour and style in solid items like clothes was difficult
enough when there were rules which said when you had to wear a
dinner jacket or could not possibly wear jeans; but all that is now
loosening up into the melting pot of global do-it-yourself, pick-and-
mix identity. The less rigid the rules, the more difficult it is to be your
conscious self in a way that communicates to others what you want
them to think and feel about you.

So, when you have built your composite style image (an iconic
juxtaposition of words), how do you choose what behaviour to adopt in
this DIY world? As a person of safe hands and sensible shoes you
might want to match your new daring get-up with a dash of raunchy
behaviour; but what is that really like and how will it be taken? Here
we are in that very tricky area of credibility. Image construction is a
usually benign form of lying; and there is nothing worse than a bad
liar. There is a paradox about coherence and incoherence which people
with impaired vision will find difficult: over-coherence is suspected of
being false while messiness, paradoxically, is seen as more authentic
but there are pitfalls in style construction.

If you think that this form of consumption and construction is difficult,
wait until you get to the creation from scratch, the "I am me"
multimedia piece involving no off-the-peg digital products. Here again,
we don't want to be limited to endless text blogging, but how will the
sector come to grips with image composition and movement? The
simple and sad answer is that we don't have a clue.

The starting point would be to put together user requirements and then
turn these in to specifications for content creation tools. Then we
would have to persuade tool makers to listen and persuade curriculum
designers to include this topic in the training of teachers and others
who work with blind people. And if you think this is all just a little
fantastic, you are probably right.

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
