+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 89, MAY 2007.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
BT Age and Disability Unit
( http://www.btplc.com/age_disability/ )
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk )

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Special Notice - Building the Perfect Council Website
- 12 July 2007.
- Olympia 2, London
http://headstar-events.com/council07/ .

Following the huge success of last year's conference, we are pleased to
present this second annual event where a wide range of experts and
practitioners will offer their view of how you can create the perfect
council website: easy to use, compelling and engaging.

A partnership between E-Government Bulletin and the Society of IT
Management's Socitm Insight Programme, the event will draw on the
collected wisdom of eight years of Socitm's annual 'Better Connected'
review of all UK council websites and feature the Better Connected
reviewers' own insights, plaudits and brickbats.

Speakers include Donna Smilie, Senior Web Accessibility Consultant,
RNIB; Dominic Tinley, Editor-In-Chief of the UK Parliament website
and Mary Reid, Mayor, Kingston upon Thames and Board Member,
ICELE. Interactive workshops will cover issues in detail including
usability, and the use of third party software. For details and to register
see:
http://headstar-events.com/council07/ .

[Special Notice ends].


++Issue 89 Contents.

++Section One: News.

01: Expert Tips For Accessible Web Content Available On DVD
- 'Web Accessibility - The Movie' released.

02: Online Guide To London Underground Launched
- new website for disabled travellers on tube network.

03: Voice Technology Helps Pilot Complete Record Breaking Flight
- blind adventurer flies half way around the globe.


News in Brief: 04: Far Sighted - equality vision consultation opens;
05: Reading Software - Google optical character recognition project;
06: Broadcast News - ACB radio launches online station.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
07: Captcha This - feedback from reader's audio captcha tool; 08: Web
Check - website accessibility request; 09: Dictionary Request - Italian
English dictionary sought.

Section Three: Focus - Web Accessibility.
10: Overcoming The Barriers To Accessible Websites: Any
organisation going through the process of making their website
accessible will come up against some pitfalls, such as justifying the
added resources needed and persuading senior management of its
importance. John Morse from Eduserv, a non-profit IT services group,
presents some useful advice.

Section Four: Focus - Employment.
11: Access To Work?: If government policy on equal employment
opportunities for disabled people is going to be successful, then many
forms of "eDiscrimination" will need to be removed. Peter Wheeler of
Salford University in the UK describes an exciting new research
project focused on improving our understanding of the barriers.

[Contents ends].


Section One: News.

+01: Expert Tips For Accessible Web Content Available On DVD.

A host of experts including Anne McGuire MP, Minister for disabled
people, have contributed to a new DVD that advocates web
accessibility and provides best practice tips and demonstrations to web
designers and commissioners in all sectors.

A World Denied aims to influence decision makers in the public,
private and third sectors about the need for accessible websites. It is
targeted at web managers, human resource departments, budget holders
and programmers, among others.

Billed as 'Web Accessibility - The Movie', the film is comprised of
interviews with key players in the field such as barrister Robin Allen
QC, Julie Howell, Director of Accessibility at website development
company Fortune Cookie and Disability Rights Commissioner Dame
Jane Campbell.

Interviews are interspersed with clips of demonstrations of the use of
assistive technology to navigate the web by AbilityNet's Head of
Accessibility Services Robin Christopherson, who is vision impaired.
Christopherson is also one of the film's executive producers, along
with Martin Greenwood, Programme Manager of the 'Socitm Insight'
team, which is responsible for promoting good practice in the design of
local authority websites.

"It covers all bases, the legal side and the business case,"
Christopherson told E-Access Bulletin. "It's a powerful self-contained
tool to leverage budgets and raise awareness," he said.

According to Christopherson, the medium of a DVD was chosen to
allow people to watch it in their own time and to include those that do
not use a computer often. He also said a film would broaden the appeal
of the subject matter. "We're not discounting the possibility of offering
it streamed online," said Christopherson.

The DVD has been produced by Society of IT Management (Socitm), a
professional body for UK local authorities, AbilityNet, the charity
focusing on access to IT by disabled people and Boilerhouse, a
communications company. A World Denied costs 50 pounds but is free
to subscribers of Socitm Insight. It can be ordered from:
http://www.socitm.gov.uk .


+02: Online Guide To London Underground Launched.
An online resource of information on travelling on the London
Underground (LU) train network for people with vision and other
mobility and sensory impairments has gone live.
The LU 'Nationwide access register,' is currently available on the
website of Direct Enquiries
( http://www.directenquiries.com/ ),
a UK company providing online searchable resources for access
information on businesses and services. The service will be integrated
with the existing Transport for London Journey Planner over the next
six to nine months.

The Direct Enquiries service enables users to make searches by
clicking on any number of 17 logos on the home page representing
their needs or disability to ensure the most relevant results. Users then
type in a London station, business or service, its location, or both. The
details returned in a search on an underground station, for example,
include information on the number of steps, lifts, escalators, walking
distances and gap width between the platform and the train.
The site also allows passengers to find out detailed information about
all 252 stations, such as whether staff are trained to help with
improving disabled access, seats, telephones and how many stairs there
are. And the resource provides detailed text only information on
interchanges between station platforms as well as street-level access
information.
The Transport for London Journey Planner will include personalisation
features, removing the need for users to tick the same options each
time they visit, and will provide live travel information feeds, LU's
Accessibility and Inclusion Manager Wayne Trevor told E-Access
Bulletin. "Accurate information is key to improving confidence in
travelling," he said.


+03: Voice Technology Helps Pilot Complete Record Breaking Flight.
Voice technology has helped blind adventurer Miles Hilton-Barber set
a new record by flying a microlight aircraft from Biggin Hill in
England to Sydney in Australia. The flight, which followed the route of
an air race staged in 1919, aims to raise 1 million pounds to help the
fight against preventable blindness in developing countries.
Hilton-Barber navigated the 13,500 miles over 21 countries using
instruments specially adapted to deliver voice output of the aircraft's
altitude, direction, and wind speed. He entered the readings into an
onboard computer using a wireless keyboard strapped to his leg.
He was accompanied by a sighted co-pilot, who was responsible for
speaking to control towers and providing back-up in case of an
emergency. The journey began on March 7 and took 55 days to
complete, requiring the pilots to deal with extreme weather conditions
such as heavy snow in the mountains of Lebanon, and tropical
rainstorms.
The flight will raise funds for Seeing Is Believing
( http://www.seeingisbelieving.org.uk/ ),
a project run by Standard Chartered Bank to promote treatment of eye
cataracts in Asia and Africa.


++News in Brief:

+04: Far Sighted: The UK government is seeking public views to feed
into a consultation to create a vision of equality for disabled people by
2025, launched by the Office for Disability Issues. Disabled people and
those whose lives are affected by disability in some way must submit
comments by 9 May. A report will be published during the Summer:
http://www.officefordisability.gov.uk/consultations .

+05: Reading Software: An open source project to develop state of the
art optical character recognition (OCR) software is underway at the
University of Kaiserslautern in Germany. Sponsored by Google, the
OCRopus development group welcomes contributions from
programmers to create a system suitable for vision impaired users,
among others, for reading documents such as letters, bills and
magazines:
http://code.google.com/p/ocropus/ .

+06: Broadcast News: An online radio station is to be launched by
ACB Radio on 7 May. Broadcast over the internet in English and other
languages it will include music, speakers and a live stream from the
Africa Forum, which focuses on breaking down barriers to social
inclusion for vision impaired Africans. ACB Radio World is looking
for potential broadcasters:
http://www.acbradio.org/ .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+07: Captcha This: Peter Abrahams, Accessibility and Usability
Practice Leader at Bloor Research writes in response to Tedd
Sperling's contribution in the March issue calling on readers to test his
accessible audio captcha tool at:
http://www.sperling.com/examples/captcha/ .
Peter writes: "I wrote an article about the problems of captcha this time
last year ( see:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/cap1 ).
If you read it and then go to the bottom you can make a comment, the
comment form has a captcha which in my humble opinion is superior
to yours for the following reasons:

1. It does not use a wheelchair as a symbol for playing the audio (for a
non vision impaired wheelchair user the use of the symbol in this
context is confusing at the least).
2. As far as I could tell the wheelchair symbol is not in the tab
sequence so I could not get to it without using a mouse.
3. When I click on the wheelchair I then have to tab to the input field
before I can type in the code even though the obvious place for the
cursor is in the input field.
4. I like the use of the phonetic alphabet but I recognise that that is
more a matter of taste.
5. Something I have heard on other sites, which neither of us does, is to
add some background noise (Google now does this). This is designed
to stop a speech to text engine being used to automate the input. I
suspect that this is only really needed if you feel the site is going to
have a denial of service type attack.

"I hope this is all helpful and I look forward to your comments."
[responses please to: inbox@headstar.com]


+08: Web Check: Margot Lindsay from the London Centre for
Dementia Care at University College in London writes: "I need an
evaluation of the usefulness of our web page to the searcher. The web
pages are at:
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dementia ."
Margot also asks: "Do you know of a feedback form I could use as I
need to get some outside evaluation of the web pages?"
[responses please to: inbox@headstar.com]


+09: Dictionary Request: Clare Page writes in response to a
contribution published in the last issue of the bulletin from Corrado
Calza on an online Italian literature resource found at:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/itrai1 .
"I found the item about the website from which audio books in Italian
can be downloaded very interesting.

"However, my Italian is not yet very fluent, and I don't have a huge
vocabulary in this language either: therefore, if I am reading or
listening to Italian, or trying to speak or write it myself, I would like to
be able to check vocabulary as I go along, to be sure that I am
understanding or using words correctly.

"For this reason, can readers please recommend a good, and
accessible, Italian-English dictionary on CD-ROM to me? I live in
France, and don't expect to go to the UK or to Italy in the foreseeable
future, so can anyone recommend a dictionary which I can buy through
the internet?

"There may well be other E-Access Bulletin readers out there who
would be interested in the reply, either English-speaking people like
me who are learning Italian, or Italians who want to improve their
English. Thank you in advance for your help."
[responses please to: inbox@headstar.com]

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three: Focus
- Web Accessibility

+10: Overcoming The Barriers To Accessible Websites
by John Morse.

Achieving a high level of website accessibility requires a higher than
average commitment from the organisation in question, as well as
additional effort on the part of the developer and designer to allow for
adequate planning, design and testing of the solution.

The time, cost and effort can be hard to justify. Since a well designed
site should be "transparently" accessible and usable, the return on
investment (ROI) can be hard to sell to decision makers, who may not
see the immediate benefits of communicating your message to a wider
audience in an accessible manner. It does, however, require a change in
the focus of the organisation to accept that there is a business case for
accessible or usable websites.

Often the people responsible for the web presence of the organisation
understand this, convincing senior management further removed from
the technology can take more time and effort than is available,
particularly when trying to achieve aggressive deadlines for delivery.
This means that the project team have to work on two or more fronts,
delays are introduced while departments wait for approval and the risk
of failure or limited ROI is increased. Shortcuts and half compromises
are easier to justify and the quality criteria of the original project are
not met as the path of least resistance is taken to meet short term,
nearsighted deadlines.

The following outline illustrates the issues that can arise in a typical
project lifecycle.

An organisation approaches a supplier with a list of requirements of the
site or application; often this list is made up of features that they have
seen on other sites, which might be considered as "cool" features.

Somewhere on that list, often hidden towards the bottom, will be a line
requiring the solution to be accessible and usable, with no real
understanding of the implications of achieving an accessible website.
Once project costs are supplied, the organisation - faced with the
additional costs and time needed to comply with the accessibility
standard - may lose its enthusiasm for delivering accessibility,
particularly if faced with losing some of the cool tools.

Then there are the corporate identity guidelines, which are often
developed by marketing teams for print materials and applied by
design agencies. In the majority of cases print-based design guides
simply do not work when applied to online digital media; colours, font
sizes and logo designs are rarely appropriate for accessible online
digital display. The overriding priority of these designs is to maintain
the corporate image. When faced with an accessible or usable online
solution which deviates from this corporate identity, then accessibility
and usability requirements, are normally sacrificed.

Then the customer is faced with controlling the way they release the
content to the web in a more structured way, in the case of using a
Content Management System (CMS), this will involve a workflow
which will require checks before publishing. The changes to the
business process are rarely welcomed by the customer's internal
content providers.

Suddenly the time cost and effort needed to develop, design and
maintain an accessible and usable solution are harder to sell to the
budget controllers in an organisation who see little immediate ROI in
developing a fully accessible solution for what is considered a minority
market, the requirements for an accessible solution get reduced to
"where possible", which usually means where it is easy.

To prevent these issues arising, senior management buy-in must be
achieved; once convinced of the benefits of accessible and usable
solutions, they can back the additional effort and associated spend on
delivering accessible services.

A more usable and accessible site can result in better customer
experience, visitors can find what they need easier and quicker, as a
result the organisation's staff are not called upon to answer routine
calls from the customer and are free to handle other issues and improve
the organisations effectiveness.

Also, the effort spent on creating a better online service can result in an
increased public profile and an improved satisfaction rating which in
turn results in increased visitor statistics and increased efficiency and
value for money. These benefits are difficult to sell at the start of a
project but are desirable for any organisation.

NOTE: John Morse is an IT Architect at Eduserv, a not-for-profit
professional IT services group, offering technology to education
institutions and public sector bodies.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Focus
- Employment.

+11: Access To Work?
by Dr Peter Wheeler.

The Informatics Research institute (IRIS) at the University of Salford
has won funding from the European Social Fund (ESF) to conduct
research into the barriers faced by many disabled people caused by
inaccessible web content design.

E-government has brought most public services to the web, although
the question of how accessible such material is appears to be an issue
of variable consistency.

This research project
( http://www.iris.salford.ac.uk/ediscrimination/ )
aims to provide local authorities in the North West region of England
with employment-related information on eDiscrimination. This will
assist their implementation of the new public duty enshrined in the
2005 Disability Discrimination Act (DDA).

The North West of England has been chosen to host this research
because this area has been identified as one where a disproportionate
number of disabled people are outside the labour market compared
with other regions. Although the project is fixed geographically,
nevertheless as with many internet based applications, the results will
be of interest and relevance to many providers of internet resources.

Clearly, if government policy in terms of increasing equality of
opportunity for disabled people to enter the workforce is to succeed,
then all forms of eDiscrimination will require removal especially at
labour market entry points.

The research team includes Dr David Kreps, an expert on web
accessibility and Dr Peter Wheeler whose research specialises in issues
related to business employment and disability. The Salford team has
approached the method of conducting the research from an interesting
perspective. Rather than attempting to categorise barriers to access
based on specific impairments, for example, those faced by visually
impaired people, the research will focus on barriers which are firmly
rooted in technology. The starting position for the Salford team is that
the web can be made accessible to all. However, if web content is not
designed to appropriate web content accessibility guidelines, then this
can disable access for adaptive computer users. The research is
directed towards the relative accessibility of employment websites and
online job application forms.

In the first instance, a representative sample of prominent employment-
related websites will be audited to provide a benchmark to determine
the general level of compliance to web content accessibility guidelines.
Industry and public sector organisations will also be invited to
participate in developing best practice approaches. However, perhaps
the most significant research partners will be people with impairments
who use adaptive computer equipment to access internet resources.

Impaired people who use either adaptive hardware or software will join
the research and it is their experiences which will help guide the
project. Individuals will be interviewed to gather general information
on what problems they encounter when accessing the web, and then
asked to carry out two tasks on a designated employment related
website.

The results of the research will be disseminated to all participants in
late 2007. Hence this research does not assign any barriers to inclusion
as assigned to an individual impairment, but regards the disability and
discrimination impaired people face as aspects of inaccessible and
inappropriate design.

NOTE: Dr Peter Wheeler is lead researcher for the 'Combating
e-discrimination project' at Salford Business School at the University
of Salford in Manchester, England.

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]