+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 95, NOVEMBER 2007.

A Headstar publication.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 95 Contents.

01: Concerns Over Government Web Accessibility Plan
- Threat to withdraw '.gov.uk' domain from uncompliant sites.

02: Exclusion Fears Over Digital TV Pilot Technology
- RNIB warnings centre on lack of 'talking' programme guide.

03: NZ Student Exposes Inaccessibility of Government Sites
- Prize for showing file formats are switched without warning.

News in Brief: 04: SharePoint Kit - Microsoft access package; 05:
Easy Mobile - new phone handset; 06: Bookshare Correction -
international service.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum. 07: Ubuntu Praise - Linux
tips; 08: Government Vapourware - UN policy scepticism; 09: Tricky
Job - council complaint; 10: Thunder Offer - Chinese screenreader
idea.

Section Three: Interview - T.V. Raman, Research Scientist, Google.
11: Cracking the Code of Accessible Search: Searching the internet is
now among the most important activities in most people's work and
social lives. Dan Jellinek talks to the man whose job is to make the
world's best-known search engine easier to use for all.

Section Four: Technology - Access to 'Web 2.0'.
12: Frustration 2.0? At the recent Techshare conference, Kath Moonan
of AbilityNet unveiled the results of her research into the new wave of
social networking sites, and asked if they were in danger of creating a
new world of exclusion.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: Techno-Footprint, 29 November 2007
- ICT and Sustainability in the Public Sector
- Stay Ahead of the Vital Green Agenda
http://www.headstar-events.com/technofootprint/ .

Large ICT systems form a significant part of a modern public sector
body's carbon footprint.

Strategies must be drawn up to reduce ICT energy use and heat
emissions; reduce and manage ICT waste; embrace flexible and mobile
working to cut transport requirements; and use technology systems to
reduce other emissions and waste. Headstar's major new annual
conference - supported by Socitm and UK CEED, the charity hosting
the UK eWell-Being awards - will offer advice and guidance to all
public sector bodies in this vital field.

Attendance costs 295 pounds plus VAT for public, voluntary and
charitable sector and 395 plus VAT for private sector delegates. For
full details and to register see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/technofootprint .

And for information about sponsoring or exhibiting at the event please
email Claire Clinton on:
claire@headstar.com
or call her on 01273 231291.

[Special notice ends.]


++Section One: News.

+01: Concerns Over Government Web Accessibility Plan.

Technology analysts have cast doubt on the viability of draft guidelines
for government websites that threaten to switch off '.gov.uk' web
addresses if they failed to reach high, 'AA' levels of accessibility.

The proposals, entitled 'Delivering inclusive websites: user-centred
accessibility', have been circulated for limited consultation by the
Central Office of Information, the Whitehall agency which assists
public bodies with communications campaigns.

If approved, they would mean that existing government sites would
have until December 2008 to meet the 'AA' standard set out in the Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) developed by the World
Wide Web Consortium. All new sites would have to confirm
immediately.

"Websites which fail to meet the mandated level of conformance shall
be subject to the withdrawal process for .gov.uk domain names," the
draft guidelines state.

The blindness charity RNIB this week broadly welcome the document,
but said it had concerns about specific areas. Henny Swan, senior web
accessibility consultant at RNIB, told E-Government Bulletin: "These
concerns are around the lack of clarity when referencing versions of
WCAG; the viability of domain removal; and the absence of detail on
the process used to assess whether sites have met that standard. How
will third party content such as payment systems be assessed for
example?

"We would rather see further resources put in place to support web
managers and their teams in creating and maintaining user-focused
accessible websites, than to penalise them."

And Martin Greenwood, of the local government Society of IT
Management (Socitm), said only three or four councils currently meet
'AA' accessibility. If the COI are really serious about this it's going to
be a tough call for many organisations."

Previous attempt at setting accessibility targets for public sector web
managers have had no impact, Greenwood said. A lower, level 'A'
target set for English council websites in 2005 as part of a set of
'priority service outcomes' failed to achieve any greater accessibility
levels than had been achieved in other parts of the UK, he said.

Asked if it would be fair to remove the .gov.uk domain from public
sector websites that failed to comply with 'AA' accessibility,
Greenwood said: "It would be fair if they were an isolated case of non-
compliance, and everybody else was complying, but it won't be an
isolated case."


+02: Exclusion Fears Over Digital TV Pilot Technology.

The RNIB has warned that blind people could be excluded from the
digital TV revolution by the lack of a 'talking menu' option on the
subsidised set-top boxes provided to older people and people with
disabilities, as part of this month's digital TV switchover pilot scheme
in Whitehaven, Cumbria.

Whitehaven residents can already only receive BBC2 with a digital
signal, and next week all their channels will switch over. After
assessment of the pilot, the next area to roll out will be the Borders
region of Scotland, in late 2008, followed by the rest of the UK in
phases.

Under a 'help scheme' funded by the Department for Culture Media
and Sport with the BBC, eligible households can receive a Freeview
set-top box with audio-description and other special access features for
just £40, including installation and some training (see
http://www.digitaluk.co.uk/helpscheme ).
For an extra charge households can receive further subsidised systems
such as a satellite TV service.

Ultimately around 7 million UK households would qualify for support
under the help scheme, including people aged 75 and over; people
claiming disability living allowance; and people registered as blind or
partially sighted. However, despite the scheme's equipment including
features such as a user-friendly remote control and compatibility with
audio description of programmes, the electronic programme guides do
not 'speak'.

"This is our main concern," RNIB Media and Culture Department
Manager Leen Petré told E-Access Bulletin this week. "Once that help
scheme person is out of the door, how will blind people know what
channel they are on?"

A joint government and BBC emerging technologies committee will
review the findings of the pilot in February and make a
recommendation about changes to the set-top boxes, including
speaking menu options, Petré said. A decision would then have to be
taken on inclusion of any new features; and also on how these would
be funded, whether by the help scheme partners or by TV users. "We
would hope it doesn't affect the price which users have to pay," Petré
said.

Last month the charity Age Concern welcomed the help scheme, but
said their own research had shown that many older people in
Whitehaven had not been ready for the change. "The experience of
Whitehaven residents signals that such support needs to be given
earlier," the charity said.


+03: NZ Student Exposes Inaccessibility of Government Sites.

A New Zealand university student has won a research award for
exposing the accessibility shortcomings of government websites, in
work that could have widespread application elsewhere in the world.

Ben Bradshaw, a fourth-year IT student at Victoria University of
Wellington, won the 1,000 NZ Dollars first prize in the NZ Computer
Society's annual student research contest. Bradshaw used a panel of
testers with impaired vision alongside the open source automated
testing program 'OpenWolf' (
http://openwolf.sf.net/ ).

According to a report on the website Computerworld, Bradshaw found
a failure of sites to indicate in advance what type of document the user
is accessing through a link, causing potential confusion for blind
readers using assistive technology (
http://fastlink.headstar.com/nz2 ).

To read more about Bradshaw's achievements in his own words, see
his personal blog, or 'blag':
http://fastlink.headstar.com/nz3 .


++News in Brief:

+04: SharePoint Kit: Microsoft has announced the launch of an
accessibility kit for websites and applications based on its 'SharePoint'
software package, designed to help organisations share, manage and
work on documents and information through a central point. The kit,
known as AKS, was developed with HiSoftware and will be provided
released through the 'shared source' Microsoft Permissive License
later this year:
http://aks.hisoftware.com .

+05: Easy Mobile: A new handset in the 'Easy' range of accessible
mobile phones has been launched in the UK by distributor
Communic8. The EasyUse handset has an anti-glare screen, large
characters, large number keypad and other accessibility features. It is
available through the RNIB shop or from Communic8 Ltd on a
Vodafone Pay as you Talk package at £139.99:
http://www.silverphone.co.uk

+06: Bookshare Correction: We incorrectly stated last issue that the
entire collection of the electronic book site 'Bookshare.org' had been
made accessible to subscribers outside the US. In fact, only a
proportion of these books - between 2,000 and 3,000 copyright books -
have been made available globally. Permission is being sought from
more publishers to allow a wider selection to be made available. We
would like to apologise for this error. For more information see a
report on the DAISY Consortium website:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/daisy1 .

[Section One ends].


++Special notice:
- Building Comfortable and Liveable Environments for All
- Call for Papers.

CIB, the international council for research and innovation in building
and construction, is pleased to announce a call for papers for the US
conference 'Building Comfortable and Liveable Environments for All',
to be held May 15-16, 2008, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
US. The event's co-hosts are CNR (National Research Council, Italy)
and The Georgia Institute of Technology.

The aim of the conference is to explore and discuss challenges, issues
and priorities that concern creating a built environment for all. Topic
areas include costs of accessibility; harmonisation of legislation and
standards; sports, recreation and accessible environments;
technological tools supporting the accessible environment; and
challenges in developing countries.

The deadline for submission of abstracts is 15 December.

For more information see the 'Conferences' section at:
http://www.cibworld.nl
or email:
l.biocca@itc.cnr.it or
jon.sanford@coa.gatech.edu .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .


+07: Ubuntu Praise: Jeff Seager, Communications Specialist at the
West Virginia Division of Rehabilitation Services in the US and a
long-time reader of our newsletter, writes in with a tip about the
accessibility of one brand of Linux operating system.

He says: "I do some web design and accessibility testing for our
website and others. At home, I've installed Ubuntu Linux on a couple
of computers. I've been happy with the results for several years, so on
Thursday (Oct. 18) I opted to upgrade to the latest Ubuntu release 7.10.
Yesterday I had a little time to examine some of the changes, and was
pleased to see that the Orca screen reader was installed by default.

"I tried it, and found it functions very well for me on a Dell Optiplex
GX-150. This is by no means a high-end computer. I thought you
might want to pass this along to your readers. It's nice to know that you
can get good accessibility to many useful applications in a stable and
free operating system. Until now, I don't think that's been true. Perhaps
this will help to level the playing field for people with disabilities."

[Please send responses to inbox@headstar.com] .


+08: Government Vapourware: Gustaw Kon, a reader living in
Germany, writes to comment with some scepticism on last issue's
report on the UN Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities,
which focuses on access to technology and is due to be passed into law
by more than 100 signatory governments.

"Yet again government produces vapourware," he writes. "Standards
are adopted to ensure accessibility of government sites. My guess is
that these are probably imports from abroad. But as section three of the
latest bulletin rather wordily pointed out, standards are useless if they
are not implemented.

"Smoke and mirrors, a nod to the variously impaired, a jewel in the
crown of politicians headed to whatever future awaits them, are no
substitute for producing the goods. I loathe the political window-
dressing which masquerades as interest in or concern for various
disabled groups."

[Please send responses to inbox@headstar.com] .


+09: Tricky Job: Our reader Norman Waddington writes in to let us
know about problems he has had in obtaining accessible formats for
applying for a job online with a local authority.

"I have just done battle with Leeds City Council. I have applied for a
job with them but had great difficulty with regard to accessibility.

"I asked them to send me the necessary documentation on Word format
so I could access it. I was promptly sent two pdf files and a document
supposedly in Word. This was not at all accessible. I informed them it
was no good and asked them to try again. They sent three more
attempts which were equally useless.

"It is as if they have no idea of the basics of accessibility for the
visually impaired. I did explain to the gentleman at Leeds in their
Human Resources Department that pdf files are no good to people
using speech software and he [had] no idea whatsoever.

"The gentleman at the council at Leeds was extremely apologetic. He
did speak to their Communications Department who informed him that
they had created a Word document. I suspect they had just changed the
file name to '.doc' and had not changed the text in the document. He
had no knowledge that there are many ways to create pdf files.

"In my experience I have only had problems with regard to web forms
with councils. Any organisations particularly in the visually impaired
sector are far more organised. I know nothing is perfect or ever will
be."

[Please send responses to inbox@headstar.com] .


+10: Thunder Offer: Further to our September feature and October
'Inbox' contribution from Kevin Chow in Hong Kong on affordable
screen-reader access in China, Roger Wilson-Hinds of
Screenreader.net writes:

"I read the 'Chinese Picture' piece in the October Inbox with great
interest, and some admiration for what is going on in China for visually
impaired people. I am glad they have got the low priced options right
from the start.

"Any blind person anywhere in the world is welcome to use our free
Thunder screenreader talking software for their personal home use.
Obviously this includes Chinese people.

"We currently only offer English and some EU languages but would
want to make a free screenreader available in China too with agreed
language options. Even so, Thunder as it is might get users going,
especially as English is so prominent amongst the PC fraternity and
remembering that many might like to learn English as they learn to use
their computers.

"So we welcome an approach from across the world and will do our
best to respond very positively. Thunder is there for the taking at:
www.screenreader.net. "

[Please send responses to inbox@headstar.com] .

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three: Interview
- T.V. Raman, Research Scientist, Google.

+11: Cracking the Code of Accessible Search
by Dan Jellinek.

It was revealed this month that Google has become the fifth biggest
company in the US, bigger even than McDonalds and Disney: a
reflection of the fact that the way we search the internet has become
one of the most important parts of our lives.

As no-one with a disability or who works with or is close to someone
with a disability needs reminding, the desires and needs of people with
disabilities are precisely the same as those of everybody else, which
means that searching the internet is high on their list, too.

Google was always a highly usable site, one of the secrets of its
success: simple and functional and text-based, which means it is fairly
accessible already to people navigating the internet using text-to-
speech converters or other special access technologies. But in recent
years the company has realised that it is not just access to the search
interface, but browsing the results; and even the accessibility of the
sites returned as results that dictates how accessible the whole search
experience has become.

The man charged with looking at these issues for Google is research
scientist T.V. Raman. Based at Google HQ in Mountain View,
California, Raman is responsible for developing Google Accessible
Search (
http://labs.google.com/accessible/ ),
a trial version of the Google search interface that is designed to be
easier to use by people with impaired vision or other disabilities,
including a system of ranking search results according to the
accessibility of the site.

"My job is to look at what Google technology can do for users with
disabilities: to make sure it works with assistive technology, and also
to look at what we can build to help in new ways," he told E-Access
Bulletin in an exclusive interview recorded during a UK trip last
month.

"Search is very useful for people with impaired vision, but one of the
things I had observed over the years is that websites returned on the
third, fourth or fifth page of results were often the most easy to read.

"I built accessible search last year to address this. It is not a different
one: it is Google, the same index, the same magic. But it swaps the
order of search results depending on whether they are easy to read."

To make this assessment, the software looks at a group of 'design
patterns' such as whether the HTML code is clearly structured;
whether the page makes sense with images turned off; how the page
uses colour; and whether the page can be used without a mouse.

"It looks at a whole bunch of things, some positive, some negative.
And it gets trained: using user feedback on the results, it is trained to
learn over time about which sites are the most useful."

The accessible search tool is still in development, though it is publicly
available through the Google testbed area 'labs.google.com'. While
still primarily marketed by word of mouth, the ultimate goal is to make
it a choice on the main Google home page, T.V. said.

As befits a multi-billion pound technology company, these days
Google's activities extend far beyond its initial core offering of an
internet search engine, and T.V.'s work also includes looking at the
wider range of Google's work such as web-based software and desktop
tools to try to ensure that these, too, are as accessible as possible.

"I am looking at the whole range of Google products that have rich
value to people with impaired vision. Blind users for example want
simple ways to add events to a calendar." To help people gain access,
Google has released the source code to its API (application
programming interface)", he said, "and we are also looking for how we
can make highly interactive web applications work better with assistive
technologies."

T.V.'s background is an unusual one for a Silicon Valley high flyer.
His initials are a clue: they stand for Tiruvilwamalai Venkatraman,
being respectively his ancestral village and his father's name, as is the
tradition in Southern India, where he was born, in 1965. Blind since
childhood, he had a tough fight on his hands in a society where the
barriers to achievement for people with disabilities are far higher than
in many more developed countries in the West - barriers of both cost
and social attitude.

Nevertheless he managed to shine as a student with particular gifts in
maths, obtaining a place at the Indian Institute of Technology in
Bombay. From there he successfully applied for a place at Cornell
University, an Ivy League institution among the best colleges in
America, travelling there in 1989 to take a PhD in mathematics.

"Taking exams like the GRE [graduate record examination, a test
required by many US educational institutions] in the 1980s with the
help of a writer was 'interesting' in India - there was a communication
gap between [the non-profit educational testing service] ETS in the US
that administers the tests (and is well-set up for handling students with
special needs) and their counterparts in India who run the tests on
behalf of ETS," said T.V. "But things got sorted out eventually."

He completed his thesis in 1994, gaining an Association of Computing
Machinery Doctoral Dissertation Award in the process.

But although his doctorate was in maths, by the time he had completed,
an interesting metamorphosis had taken place. "I was a mathematician,
but I built all the computer systems to access what I needed, and by the
time I had finished I was a computer scientist, not a mathematician any
more."

Following his graduation, one of his best known projects has been the
invention and continued development of Emacspeak, a speech interface
to the complete PC desktop including web and email access (the name
is derived from the term 'Emacs', a powerful type of text editor and
interface often used by computer programmers).

His subsequent path to Google was a highly successful career in
programming and systems development followed at some of the
world's biggest names in innovation including Xerox, Digital
Equipment Corporation, Adobe Systems and IBM Research.

At IBM he worked on developing a speech interface for mobile web
applications such as online shopping. The solution was developed as a
mainstream application, he says, though it would be useful for blind
people.

Despite his switch to IT, his heart has remained with maths: his
favourite pastime is solving puzzles which require an intuitive feel for
numbers and mathematical patterns. He can solve a Braille version of
the Rubik's Cube, for example, in just 30 seconds (for a video of this
remarkable feat, see:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/rubik1 ).

And so to Google in August 2005, where he has become one of the key
modern players in access to information by people with impaired
vision. If anyone can solve the puzzle of full accessibility, it is surely
T.V. Raman.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four: Technology
- Access to 'Web 2.0'.

+12: Frustration 2.0?
by Dan Jellinek.

Is the phenomenon of 'Web 2.0' - websites where users can share their
own content, such as social network Facebook or video-sharing site
YouTube - destined to create a whole bleak new world of information
that is inaccessible to people with disabilities?

Such was the depressing question posed by Kath Moonan, Senior
Accessibility and Usability Consultant at computer access charity
AbilityNet, to delegates at last month's Techshare 2007 conference
hosted by the RNIB and other disability charities in London (
http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare ).

"Web 2.0 describes a move from static, content-driven sites to
collaborative sites. They are more like a desktop application might
work," Moonan said.

Not only are such sites gaining in popularity and in their range of uses,
Moonan said, but increasingly they are also linking up together into
one huge 'ecosystem' of sites. For example, you can easily link to a
video on YouTube from your page in the music sharing and social
networking site MySpace.

But unless accessibility is taken seriously by the makers of these sites,
entire categories of web user could end up being excluded from this
interdependent world, Moonan said. "One of the problems is we're in
danger of creating a whole inaccessible ecosystem because the major
players don't take accessibility seriously," she said. "And if the big
ones don't do it, nobody bothers. So if you're building for example a
Facebook application [a small software tool that any develop can build
to add extra functions tot he social network], and Facebook doesn't
require any accessibility from you, you say why should I? It builds a
culture of complacency."

All this is doubly galling because, just as the original information-
based web opened up new possibilities for people with disabilities in
accessing information independently, so online social networking has
the potential to allow new types of social interaction to take place
between people with disabilities and everybody else. But only if the
systems are accessible to all, Moonan said.

She illustrated Web 2.0's potential by playing a video interview with
Damon Rose, editor of the BBC disability magazine website 'Ouch'.
Rose, who is blind, said that tools like Facebook could be extremely
useful for networking with people you might come across at a business
conference, because if you are blind, it might be hard to pick them out
when you are at the conference itself, for example if you have just
heard somebody give a talk that you liked, but you can't see where
they are. With Facebook, you can network afterwards without physical
mobility being an issue.

Other examples of useful Web 2.0 content include videos on the young
people's online network Bebo with British Sign Language content,
Moonan said.

AbilityNet is carrying out an online survey of web users with
disabilities to assess their experiences of Web 2.0, she said. "We are
keeping it going because so far we have had a small number of
respondents. But a lot of people have emailed us and said 'Hi, I'm glad
you're doing a survey, but I can't access any of the Web 2.0 sites to
answer the questions. Can you let me know when they are accessible
and I can go and find out about them?" said Moonan. "Does this sound
familiar from Web 1.0?"

So what are the features of Web 2.0 sites that present the biggest
access problems for people using screen-readers or other special access
technologies?

Perhaps the biggest single problem is caused by 'captcha' tools,
Moonan said. These are graphical panels displaying a visually distorted
sequence of letters or numbers that people must enter to proceed. The
tests are designed to weed out the automated 'spambot' programmes
that try to take over interactive websites for advertising, and which
cannot recognise visually distorted characters; but they have the side-
effect of also excluding people using non-visual ways of accessing the
web.

"Captcha tools can be incredibly difficult if you have low vision or
dyslexia, and they shut out blind users altogether," Moonan said. On
one site we saw, you can't even contact customer support because of a
captcha file.

Another problem with many of the new Web 2.0 sites is that, in the
rush to break new ground and be the first to innovate, developers often
put incomplete or test versions of a site up before they fully ready, and
look to iron out any problems such as accessibility problems in future
phases or 'iterations', she said.

"They say we'll put it up broken and fix it later. And so you end up
with sites like MySpace - 'table soup' for screen-reader users. Has
Web 2.0 created a culture of inaccessibility as in the early days of the
web, from which we are still picking up the pieces? Are we developing
a new generation of cowboy developers?"

If the answers to such questions are to be positive, there are a number
of basic steps all developers must start to take, Moonan said. These
include that:

- All captcha graphics should have an audio alternative;

- In the longer term, non-visual alternatives to captcha must be used
such as email verification or mobile phone verification;

- Help pages and navigational signposting throughout the site should
be developed and improved;

- If multimedia is used, it should be easy to turn audio and video feeds
on and off;

- There should always be alternative ways of interacting with the same
information.

Ultimately the goal is equality of access, Moonan said - whatever the
sites are used for. "One description of social networking sites is sites
that allow people to waste time at work. And because I believe in
equality, I believe everyone should be able to waste time at work."

NOTE: The AbilityNet survey on access to social networking websites
is available for completion on the web until 10 December. Fill it out at:
http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/socialnetworking .

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all
your colleagues to sign up! To unsubscribe at any time, put
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address:
http://www.headstar.com/eab
is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Editorial advisors - Kevin Carey, Derek Parkinson, Mel Poluck
Marketing Executive - Claire Clinton
Sales and Marketing - Jo Knell, Will Knox.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue 95 ends.]
