+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN
- ISSUE 94, OCTOBER 2007.

A Headstar publication.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by:
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk ).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 94 Contents.

01: Accessibility Ultimatum Proposed for UK Government Sites
- 'gov.uk' domain could be withdrawn for non-compliance.

02: Vision-Impaired IT Worker Wins Discrimination Case
- Ruling against Siemens in Ireland after job application problems.

03: Developers Fight to Save BBC's Suspended Learning Resource
- 'Benjamin's House' shut down by anti-competition action.

News in Brief: 04: Allowance Correction - from last issue; 05: Virtual
Libraries - international e-book services; 06: Leopard's Hotspots -
Apple operating system access features.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Chinese Picture - national update; 09: Sound advice - Talking
menus for the iPod.

Section Three: Conference Report - Techshare.
10: Conventional Access : Some 14 of the 32 articles of the United
Nations 'Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities' relate to
technologies, and the UN is now gathering information from its
member countries on how to ensure these plans are realised. In the UK,
this process began at the recent Techshare conference.

Section Four: Focus - Education.
11: Moodling About: Nick Freear and Chetz Colwell write on their
experiences of ensuring the accessibility of the widely-used open
source online education platform Moodle at the Open University in the
UK, where one in 20 students have a disability.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: e-Democracy '07
- 08 November 2007, London
- http://www.headstar-events.com/edemocracy07 .

Dot.com entrepreneur Martha Lane Fox; Demos founder UK
Parliament webmaster Dominic Tinley; and shadow Leader of the
House of Commons Theresa May are among the unrivalled speaker
line-up at e-Democracy '07, Headstar's annual conference on the use of
the internet and other new technologies to improve the workings of
democracy.

Back for our third year, the event is set to be the UK's
largest ever dedicated e-democracy conference and exhibition,
focusing this year on local e-democracy; a look at e-democracy in New
Zealand; 10 Downing Street's e-petitions; and the role of social
networking and virtual worlds in e-democracy.

Sponsors and supporters to date include ICELE (the International
Centre for Excellence in Local E-Democracy); Cisco; the Hansard
Society; Screenreader.net; the London Borough of Redbridge;
MySociety.org and Prospect. For details on prices and to register see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/edemocracy07 .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Accessibility Ultimatum Proposed for UK Government Websites.

Government websites may be stripped of their 'gov.uk' domain names
if they fail to meet tough new standards of accessibility to web users
with disabilities, according to confidential draft proposals seen by E-
Access Bulletin's sister publication E-Government Bulletin.

The guidelines, entitled 'Delivering inclusive websites: user-centred
accessibility', are being drafted by the Central Office of Information,
the Whitehall agency which assists public bodies with communications
campaigns.

If approved, they would mean that existing government sites would
have until December 2008 to meet the 'AA' standard set out in the
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) developed by the
World Wide Web Consortium. All new sites would have to confirm
immediately.

"Any new site approved by the Cabinet Sub-Committee on Public
Engagement and the Delivery of Service.must conform to these
guidelines from the point of publication," the draft guidelines state.
"Continuing standalone sites must achieve this level of accessibility by
December 2008. Websites which fail to meet the mandated level of
conformance shall be subject to the withdrawal process for .gov.uk
domain names, as set out in Naming and Registering Websites."

Government will have a mountain to climb in order to comply with
these standards, according to the best available evidence. No
government websites achieved the 'AA' standard, according to the
most comprehensive research in this area, published by the Cabinet
Office in 2005 as part of the UK Presidency of the EU. Just 3 per cent
of government websites in the EU reached the minimum 'A' standard (
http://fastlink.headstar.com/coi2 )

The CoI document includes guidance on how to achieve the required
standards when commissioning new websites, such as how to check
compliance with WCAG; and how to involve people with disabilities
in planning and testing the website. Many of the essential elements are
set out in the Publicly Available Specification (PAS 78:2006) 'Guide
To Good Practice In Commissioning Accessible Website,' says CoI
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/pas3 ).

However, the CoI acknowledges that modifying existing websites to
improve their accessibility will be more difficult and expensive.

NOTE: To comment on this story or the issues it raises, please visit the
E-Access Bulletin Live blog:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/ .


+02: Vision-Impaired IT Worker Wins Discrimination Case.

A vision impaired IT professional has been has been awarded 12,000
Euros compensation by an industrial tribunal in Ireland after it was
accepted that a recruitment process used by multinational company
Siemens discriminated against job applicants with disabilities.

The Labour Court in Dublin concluded that Martin O'Sullivan 'was
denied an opportunity to undertake an integral and otherwise integral
part of the selection process because of his disability. This meant that
the whole selection process was tainted with discrimination' (see:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/siem1 ).

For O'Sullivan, the hearing concludes a two-and-a-half year struggle to
show that the recruitment process used by Siemens discriminated
against vision-impaired applicants because of their disability, in
contravention of Ireland's Employment Equality Act.

In November 2004, O'Sullivan applied for a position as an IT Support
Specialist with Siemens. Applicants were required to complete a
written assessment and attend an interview, but O'Sullivan's request
for a copy of the written test in an accessible electronic format was
refused. "Instead they asked me some questions at the interview. The
questions which they asked me at the interview were not as
comprehensive as those which were given to applicants who undertook
the written test. I formed the opinion that this would place me at a
disadvantage when it came to assessing my application for the
position," he told E-Access Bulletin.

When O'Sullivan was told that his application had been unsuccessful
he phoned Siemens to find out more. "I was certain that I had been
discriminated against, so I contacted them . . . to enquire as to whether
or not my vision impairment was the factor by which they decided not
to give me the job. They replied 'Yes'," said O'Sullivan.

Now working for IBM on its Easy Access Web Project, O'Sullivan
told E-Access Bulletin that the time taken to resolve the issue was the
most troubling aspect of pursuing Siemens. "I did not find the
experience [of being cross-examined] very stressful. The only thing
which was frustrating about it was the length of time it took. Almost
two and a half years to complete," he said.

NOTE: To comment on this story or the issues it raises, please visit the
E-Access Bulletin Live blog:
http://www.headstar.com/eablive/ .


+03: Developers Fight to Save BBC's Suspended Learning Resource.

The developers of a free online learning resource for vision-impaired
children, originally developed by the BBC but suspended from release
following anti-competition complaints from private sector educational
software suppliers, are seeking help to make the resource publicly
available.

'Benjamin's house' is a game aiming to teach literacy, Braille, and IT
through a virtual tour of British poet Benjamin Zephaniah's house. The
resource is one of hundreds of free online learning resources aimed at
five- to sixteen-year-old learners with and without a disability
developed between 2003 and 2006 under the umbrella of BBC's
'digital curriculum,' also known as 'BBC Jam'.

But the BBC Trust decided to suspend Jam a month before it was due
to go live, after legal arguments from private sector companies that it
would damage their commercial interests. "We have the first English
and Braille literacy software but we can't launch it," Jonathan Hassell,
Accessibility Editor of BBC Jam Hassell told delegates at the annual
RNIB-hosted conference Techshare this month.

Hassell and co-developer Nick Kind of not-for-profit e-learning
organisation Spark Learning
( http://www.sparklearning.com/ ),
of the development team, appealed to delegates for ideas on how to
take the programme forward. "There's a possibility we can get this out
there and transform kids' lives," Hassell said. Nick Kind has published
a blog on the suspension of Jam - originally launched in October 2006
- at:
http://nickkind.blogspot.com/ .

Benjamin's House users encounter colourful characters living in the
house, including a spider and a hoover, triggering audible poems,
stories and games about grammar and language, as they navigate
rooms and furniture. "We wanted to do things that had never been done
before using the wonderful archive of BBC materials," Hassell told
delegates. The game has been tested across the country, from
"Glasgow to Cornwall," he said.

Unusually, it was designed with both vision impaired and sighted users
in mind.

All Benjamin's House content has audio output and plain text
descriptions of the layout of the house including descriptions of the
sights, sounds and smells of the house are available at each step of the
"tour." The game was developed for mainly home use to "bridge the
home-school divide through the internet," said Hassell.

NOTE: To see E-Access Bulletin's previous coverage of BBC Jam go
to the free-to-use archives and search for Issue January 2007: 'Sticky
By Name, Sticky By Nature,' Section Three at:
http://www.headstar.com/eab/archive.html .


++News in Brief:

+04: Allowance Correction: In the last issue of E-Access Bulletin we
incorrectly wrote that Disability Living Allowance was a means tested
benefit, when in fact it is not dependent on income or savings. We
would like to apologise for this error.

+05: Virtual Libraries: Over 34,000 accessible format audio books
have been made available to international subscribers for the first time
by Bookshare.org, a non-profit US-based organisation. The collection,
in English, also includes 1,000 Spanish titles. Subscription costs 75
dollars, less than 40 pounds for the first year, payable by credit card:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/bookshare1 .
Meanwhile, more than a thousand downloadable audiobook titles
in MP3 format have been made available by US based online
retailer eMusic on a subscription basis, costing 9.99 dollars or around
five pounds:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/emusic1 .

+06: Leopard's Hotspots: Support for Braille displays and note taking
devices and a more natural sounding voice output are among the
improved accessibility features from the latest operating system from
Apple. Leopard's new feature for the 'VoiceOver' tool monitors an
object or area in an accessible window using "hot spots" and notifies
the user when something changes:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/leopard1 .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to:
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Chinese Picture: Kevin Chow, a blind person living in Hong
Kong, writes in response to the feature published in the last issue 'The
Distance Between Rights And Reality,' Section Three, by Julie
Howell. "I read Ms Howell's article on her trip to China with great
interest. Many of the disadvantaged groups in China are still deprived
of the benefits of ICT, especially those living in the rural areas, but I
have witnessed many big strides made by the Chinese Government in
bridging the digital divide for people with vision impairment in recent
years," he writes.

"The following are some of the major programmes and initiatives: In
2004, the first National Accessible Information Conference was held in
Beijing, which I believe has now become an annual event. The
conference, which aims to promote accessible digital technologies and
electronics services for people with disabilities, has successfully gained
participation and support from many of the big names in the ICT
industry, such as Microsoft, IBM and HP.

"The China Disabled Person's Federation (CDPF) has rolled out free
ICT training classes in its centres in many of the cities to teach vision-
impaired people to use computers and browse the net.

"The most significant initiative however, is its support provided for the
development of assistive tools for the disabled. In China, you can
acquire a Chinese screen reader with reasonable functions, nothing
compared with that of JAWS or SuperNova, for around 60 pounds, a
mobile phone with built-in, fully-fledged speech-enabled functions for
well under 70 pounds, and a speech-enabled MP3 machine for a mere
40 pounds.

"In regarding to digital divide in developing countries, I reckon the
hardest hurdle for vision-impaired people in closing the gap is the
prohibitive high price tag that comes with most of the assistive tools
now produced in western countries. China is worthy of exploration in
sourcing affordable assistive aids for people in need. Anybody who
wishes to discuss more on the above is welcome to contact me:
[Further responses to inbox@headstar.com] .


+09: Sound Advice: There have been several responses to John
Turley's request for help accessing his Apple iPod. He wanted to know
if on-screen information could be made audible. Rich Caloggero,
Accessibility Researcher with the National Center for Accessible
Media suggests he should download 'Rockbox':
http://www.rockbox.org/

Rich says: "This is "firmware," essentially system software, which you
can load onto your player. It makes the menus and controls talk. I
haven't got an mp3 player, so have no first hand experience with this,
but have heard good things about it."

The Rockbox software will run on a wide range of players including
most iPods: a full list is on the home page of its website.

Akbar Currim from Bombay, India also offered advice on Rockbox
including an online talk: "Archives for the Tech Talk training on
Rockbox, the open source firmware system that makes many off-the-
shelf mp3 players accessible, on podcasting, on Windows Vista and
many others are now available. See:
http://accessibleworld.org/show.php?contentid=43 ."

And Anna Dresner from the US, an author who has written about
media player accessibility was another recommending RockBox, and
also writes:

"There is also a program called VoiceBox that finds the files on your
player and generates voice clips so that Rockbox can speak file and
folder names. The software is still under development, so it's not
always as stable as you would wish, but it can be a good option if you
don't mind that sort of thing. Check out Brian Hartgen's Portable
Players Portal at
http://www.hartgen.org
for more information."
[further reponses to inbox@headstar.com] .

[Inbox ends].


++Section Three - Conference Report
- Techshare 2007.

+10: Conventional Access
by Derek Parkinson.

Access to online services for people with disabilities, including e-
government services, is set to become a key focus of efforts by the
United Nations (UN) to promote human rights, delegates heard at
Techshare 2007, a conference staged by the Royal National Institute
for Blind People this month
( http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare ).

The UN Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities is the
first human rights convention adopted this millennium, and almost half
of the convention is devoted to access to information technologies, said
Axel Leblois, Director of the Global Initiative for Inclusive
Information and Communication Technologies (G3ICT).

"The key aspects are the definition of disability, which takes an
important step in acknowledging that society bears some responsibility
for the barriers that people with disabilities face. Also significant is the
focus on use of ICTs. There are 32 articles, and 14 deal with ICTs,"
said Leblois, whose organisation is leading the UN effort to discover
what progress nations have made in ensuring that technology is
accessible.

Some 114 countries have signed the convention since it was introduced
in March 2007, said he said. The next step is for these countries to
ratify the convention, implementing its articles in national legislation,
where necessary, he said. "In the short term, most states will be
looking at their own legislation and comparing it with the Convention.
Some will have to introduce a lot of new legislation. Others, such as
the UK for example, will be identifying any holes and taking steps to
fill the gaps," said Leblois. The public sector will have a key role in
helping to put the Convention into practice, he said. "Government has
to do something. In many cases it will be changing procurement rules,
starting with public procurement," said Leblois.

Later in the day, Leblois led a round-table discussion with participants
from across all sectors to identify examples of good practice in
ensuring that new technologies are accessible to people with
disabilities. The public sector in the UK has based its approach on two
main pillars: legislation and standards, participants said. The Disability
Discrimination Act sets out the main legal requirements of access to
technology, including special provisions for the public sector such as
the Disability Equality Duty, which requires public bodies to actively
promote the interests of people with disabilities.

The UK government has also mandated standards for public sector IT,
to ensure that online services are of a consistently high quality,
participants said. Some of these standards, such as the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines drafted by a special interest group of the
World Wide Web Consortium, are international, while others are
"home grown", Leblois heard.

This approach has delivered improvements, but the UK public sector
could do more to improve the accessibility of e-services, participants
said. Mandatory standards and legislation can encourage a "tick-box"
approach to accessibility, rather than a focus on the needs of end-users,
Leblois was told. Some UK government websites comply with
accessibility requirements in a technical sense, but are still difficult and
unrewarding to use by people with disabilities, the meeting was told.
More effort has gone into promoting accessibility standards for e-
services than in sharing good practice and actively helping bodies who
are struggling. Little effort is made to check compliance with
standards.

In many public bodies it is difficult to identify a single person or
department in a public sector organisation who is responsible for
accessibility of e-services, participants said. Until relatively recently
UK e-government had a champion in the form of the e-Envoy, but
holders of this post, first Alex Allan and subsequently Andrew Pinder,
were charged with promoting e-services to the public sector to migrate
rather than accessibility specifically, Leblois heard. Ultimately,
responsibility for central government websites has been spread
between the Cabinet Office, the Central Office of Information, and the
Department for Work and Pensions, participants said.

This lack of ownership can also has be seen at local government level,
participants said. However, some councils have made good progress
and central government could learn from their example, Leblois heard.
Participants said the achievements of individual councils can often be
attributed to a desire to distinguish themselves from neighbouring
authorities, or in being lucky enough to have staff with a strong
personal commitment to accessibility. Local government also examines
its own achievements with initiatives such as the annual 'Better
Connected' survey of council websites, run by the Society of IT
Management, the meeting heard. The only other publicly available
assessments of how well government is progressing comes through the
efforts of organisations such as RNIB to reward good practice, but
awards ceremonies are no substitute for a comprehensive audit of
accessibility, Leblois heard. Overall, the result is patchy progress
across government.

The first visible impact of the convention will be the publication this
month of G3ICT research falling under four themes: examples of good
practice; analysis of the barriers to accessibility by private sector
suppliers; standards, and how they can be harmonised; and legislation
and regulations, Leblois said. The research will be published in print
and accessible electronic formats, he said. "We want to encourage
feedback. We would like to see people sending us their own case
studies," he said.

[Section Three ends].


++Section Four - Focus
- Education.

+11: Moodling About
by Nick Freear and Chetz Colwell.

The Open University is the only university in the United Kingdom
dedicated to distance learning, with a mission to be "open to people,
places, methods and ideas". It is one of the largest universities in
Europe, with approximately 150,000 undergraduate students, and 1 in
20 of these students declare some type of disability.

In October 2005, the Open University adopted the open source learning
software system 'Moodle' as its virtual learning environment. Moodle
is a learning or course management system that supports an
educational model whereby learners are also teachers, and vice versa.
Students, teachers and lecturers access Moodle over the internet via
their Web browser.

The software was first developed by Martin Dougiamas from Perth,
Australia as a PhD project in 2002, based on his experiences as a
university system administrator. It is open source, like Linux and
Mozilla Firefox, which means that anyone can download, modify and
use it for teaching. Its name stands for 'Modular Object-Oriented
Dynamic Learning Environment', and there are many modular
activities that can be mixed and matched: blog, forum, glossary, quiz,
wiki and so on. There are various other plug-in features available
including course formats, question types, text filters, language packs
and themes (for styling) - about 20 in all.

There are now more 25,000 registered Moodle user sites in
universities, colleges, schools, government and companies across the
world, in 75 languages. The Open University has funded and
contributed a lot of development work to the project since 2005,
including necessary improvements to accessibility (together with the
Italian research groups FORMEZ and ISS). The worldwide use of
Moodle ensures that these advances will affect many users in the
university, the UK and beyond.

Since February 2006 ongoing expert evaluations of accessibility have
been conducted. These have covered the majority of available Moodle
tools and activities. The initial testing fed into a long list of issues
that became the specification for further accessibility developments.
Regular evaluations with students are also being conducted, involving
disabled and non-disabled students. Three rounds of evaluations have
occurred since December 2006, involving 32 students, of whom 14
have disabilities. These have focused on course web sites, forum, wiki,
quiz, and profile. These student evaluations are observational sessions
using the 'think aloud' technique while students conduct realistic tasks
in an educational context.

The accessibility problems that have been identified during expert and
student evaluations are in the process of being fixed in each new
Moodle release. In Moodle 1.6, released in June 2006, some missing
ALT text was provided, heading markup was used for headings, layout
tables were removed, colour contrast was improved, and list markup
was used for lists.

In version 1.8, released in March 2007, a forms library was adopted in
order to standardise forms to use appropriate form markup, and this
work is still ongoing. Some deprecated tags were removed, keyboard
shortcuts were added to the text editor, alternatives were provided
where colour or format were used alone to convey information,
additional list markup was added, and there was work to ensure that all
aspects are usable without Javascript.

In the next release, due in October 2007, it is anticipated that there will
be further improvements to form markup, and list markup will be
added. There are further outstanding issues which it is hoped will be
addressed in future versions of Moodle (version 2.0 is expected mid-
2008) including removal of remaining layout tables, further forms
improvement, and removal of remaining deprecated tags.

Clearly there are challenges when working on this type of large-scale
project. Firstly there is the difficulty of fixing accessibility issues
retrospectively. Moodle is a large and complex system with over 1
million lines of code in the core product, and an estimated
development time of 275 person-years. Developers use a wide range of
tools and searching for and fixing problems within it is not a trivial
task. Secondly, while it will be possible to resolve the user interface
accessibility problems, it is more difficult to ensure teacher and
student-generated material will be accessible. For example, when using
collaborative tools such as wikis and forums it is difficult to ensure that
students use heading tags for headings and meaningful text in links
when creating online content. Of course this is an issue for all user-
generated online content.

Other challenges include raising the awareness of accessibility issues
and techniques among an international group of paid and volunteer
developers and maintainers from a diverse range of backgrounds. This
is particularly an issue for third party modules, themes and language
packs.

The potential of online learning to widen participation should
transform the educational experience for many, including those with
disabilities. We hope that the accessibility improvements being
undertaken in Moodle will help achieve this goal.

NOTE: Dr Nicholas Freear is Technical Developer for Learning and
Teaching Solutions and Dr Chetz Colwell is Project Officer at the
Accessibility in Educational Media team, Institute of Educational
Technology, at The Open University:
http://iet.open.ac.uk/aem .

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2007 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
