E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for 
the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts.]

ISSUE 16, APRIL 2001.

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News.
- Treasury banks on deafblind access; The 
bulletin goes multilingual; Pret a porter; 
Italian government site open for testing; 
Internet users look back on radio days; 
Cybersatirists wanted; quiet please: the RNIB 
library goes online; News in brief: BT results, 
drug talk.

Section Two: Democracy
- Electoral technology.

Section Three: Mobile technology
- Bluetooth.

Section Four: News analysis
- DERA.

[Contents ends.]


SECTION ONE - NEWS.


TREASURY BANKS ON DEAFBLIND 
ACCESS.

A 0.5 million UK Pounds research project 
into tactile Internet access began this week 
with the backing of a three UK government 
agencies.

The project aims to create a computer 
communication device unifying tactile mice, 
gloves and screens with traditional deafblind 
communication techniques of palm spelling, 
tactile Morse code and 'tadoma', a way to 
recognise speech with touch.

Funding for the research comes from the 
Treasury's 62 million 'Invest to Save' budget, 
which was channelled through the 
Department of Health to the Defence 
Evaluation and Research Agency, which will 
be overseeing the work.

According to Maurice Bardsley at DERA, the 
research secured funding partly because it 
may help the government to reach its targets 
for the provision of government services 
online. A Treasury spokesperson said the 
savings which Invest to Save required of 
Invest to Save projects can be "savings in 
terms of convenience," not just of public 
money.

The DERA team will collaborate with 
researchers at the Sensory Disabilities 
Research Unit at the University of 
Hertfordshire 
(http://phoenix.herts.ac.uk/SDRU/hmpage.ht
ml); and Deafblind UK 
(http://www.deafblinduk.org.uk), a charity 
which plans to find deafblind people to test 
the technology. Dr John Gill, who heads the 
RNIB's scientific research unit, will sit on the 
project's management board.

* See also 'Special needs – the mother of 
invention', section four, this issue.


THE BULLETIN GOES MULTILINGUAL.

This issue sees the launch of an Italian 
language version of E-Access Bulletin, in 
partnership with the Cavazza Institute in 
Bologna.

The concept is the brainchild of the institute's 
director Mario Barbuto, who offered to 
translate each issue and the necessary 
subscription messages, and to help promote 
the bulletin in Italy. The Cavazza Institute for 
the Blind, founded in 1881, is one of Italy's 
leading organisations in the field of blindness. 
Its wide-ranging work includes education, 
vocational training, the distribution of 
technical devices, and Braille and talking 
book production.

The institute's Italian language web site is at 
www.cavazza.it and information on the 
Italian version of E-Access Bulletin including 
an archive can be found at 
http://www.cavazza.it/eab
To subscribe, Italian readers simply send a 
blank email to:
eab-it-subs@headstar.com

E-Access Bulletin is seeking partners in other 
countries to create new language versions. 
Partners will share copyright in their 
language version, and be able to promote 
their work through it. So if you represent an 
organisation outside the UK working with 
blind and visually impaired people, perhaps 
you could help us produce our next version in 
French, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, 
Norwegian, Swedish . . . the world's the 
limit! Please email the bulletin's Dan Jellinek 
on dan@headstar.com with your proposal.


PRET A PORTER.

E-Access Bulletin reader David Porter, who 
is visually impaired, has sent in a query about 
a hand-held device to help blind people select 
clothes to wear without choosing clashing 
colours, by emitting sound signals.

"My interest is in something which would 
enable totally blind people to find articles of 
clothing electronically, which would enable 
them to dress in appropriate colours or 
shades", he says. "This would be a great 
advance on sewing buttons to various 
garments, so that they could be matched by 
button combinations. Some time ago I heard 
of the hand-held device and would like to 
hear from anyone who may know anything 
more about it". However, he adds that "even 
when my sight was normal, I could never 
match clothing colours which my wife said 
were right!"

If anyone has heard of such a device, please 
email the editor on dan@headstar.com and 
we will pass the information on to David.


ITALIAN GOVERNMENT SITE OPEN 
FOR TESTING.

The Italian government has taken the 
innovative step of opening up a test version 
of its main web site for accessibility testing 
ahead of its relaunch later this year.

The test site, which has been publicised to the 
Italian speaking blind and visually impaired 
community through the World Wide Web 
Consortium's accessibility initiative, is at 
http://194.242.231.57 and can be accessed 
using user name: 'wai' and password: 
'demo'. It will eventually come online to 
replace the one currently at 
http://www.governo.it, 

The move follows a directive from the Italian 
government "inviting" all web designers who 
are in a position to comply with W3C web 
accessibility guidelines to do so – a 
compromise wording after legislation forcing 
accessibility was ruled out.


INTERNET USERS LOOK BACK ON 
RADIO DAYS.

A new email discussion group has been 
created to provide a platform for blind and 
sighted people to reminisce about favourites 
of radio.

The group was started by Clive Lever of the 
Visually Impaired Radio and Electronics 
Society (VIRES), an organisation promoting 
the use enjoyment of radio and electronics by 
blind and visually impaired people.

"If you get half-a-dozen blind people together 
in a bar, within the first hour, the chances are 
that some of them will be comparing 
experiences of radio", Lever says.

Recent topics discussed on the list range from 
radio versions of Balzac's Old Goriot to Meet 
the Huggets, a programme for children 
broadcast on BBC Radio 2. To join in, send a 
blank message to uk-radio-listeners-
subscribe@yahoogroups.com


CYBERSATIRISTS WANTED.

Web designers with an axe to grind about 
accessibility are invited to volunteer their 
ideas and services to produce a web site 
parodying the worst in commercial web 
design.

Once complete Joe Clark, the accessibility 
guru behind the project, says that the site will 
say to users: "After you're done laughing, 
you can learn how we made what seems to be 
a perfectly ordinary site completely 
accessible."

Since issuing his invitation to comedy coders 
in late May, Clark has been sent a handful of 
good ideas and had pledges of help from over 
twenty designers, but he is still keen to enlist 
more. To get involved email 
joeclark@joeclark.org

And to read more about Joe Clark see 
http://www.joeclark.org


QUIET PLEASE: THE RNIB LIBRARY 
GOES ONLINE.

Europe's most extensive research and 
reference library on sight loss and blindness 
went online this month. The resource is the 
result of a collaboration between the National 
Library for the Blind and the RNIB, which 
contributed their classification systems and 
publication archive respectively.

Other libraries, such as the Canadian National 
Institute for the Blind can also be accessed, 
along with a wide range of electronic 
resources.

To visit the library, go to:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/library/research


NEWS IN BRIEF.

BT RESULTS: The telecommunications 
giant BT has recently completed a user 
survey of the accessibility of its corporate 
web site (http://www.bt.com). Results are due 
in June - for more information email 
disability@bt.com

DRUG TALK: A gadget that can read labels 
on medicine bottles is being tested by 
Chicago's Hines Veterans Administration 
Hospital and the Rush-Presbyterian-St.Lukes 
Medical Center. The system, called 
ScripTalk, is manufactured by En-Vision 
America:
http://www.envisionamerica.com/grst1.html

[Section One ends.]


SECTION TWO: DEMOCRACY
- ELECTORAL TECHNOLOGY.

VOTING IN PRIVATE - A BASIC HUMAN 
RIGHT.
By Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

If something good were to emerge from the 
US election fiasco in Florida, it could be that 
America takes a closer look at how their 
voting system could be improved, including 
new access facilities allowing people with 
disabilities to vote, unaided, in the privacy of 
their own booth.

From September last year, Texas reluctantly 
led the way with a law - forced through by 
litigation lasting a decade - requiring that any 
county in the state purchasing new voting 
equipment had to buy machines that are 
accessible to all. However in other states, 
disabled or visually impaired people who are 
not able to cast their own vote still have to be 
accompanied by another person to verify or 
cast the vote for them.

In the UK, in the forthcoming general 
election voters will benefit from new 
legislation – the Representation of the People 
Act 2000 - requiring that all polling stations 
must use a 'tactile ballot template' to slot 
over the ballot paper. Stations must also 
display a large print copy of the ballot paper, 
and a person requiring assistance in the 
voting booth is now legally entitled to 
second-person support.

The tactile ballot template was developed in 
consultation with organisations representing 
the interests of the blind or visually impaired 
including RNIB and launched by the Home 
Office in March. The template will slot over 
the ballot paper with raised numbers and 
Braille to represent each candidate. The voter 
will be able to lift the area of the template 
next to the corresponding number to mark the 
ballot paper and make his or her decision 
privately.

Research by the RNIB shows that 60 per cent 
of blind or visually impaired people voted at 
the last general election, compared with 71.5 
per cent of the total UK electorate. More than 
half of those that did not vote felt that it was 
too difficult.

The institute hopes that the figure will 
improve this time around, although according 
to Dermot Ryan, Campaigns Officer for 
accessible information, there are still a few 
problems associated with the new tactile 
device.

"While it's fantastic that the device has been 
implemented, the Home Office have not 
given any money to publicise it so many 
people won't actually know about it", Ryan 
said. "Many people who are visually impaired 
don't look it and the use of the device in 
individual polling stations depends largely on 
the vigilance of the presiding officer 
recognising them as such.

"The device also has limitations as the 
presiding officer will need to tell the voter 
which number represents which candidate if 
they are unable to see the large print posters."

The Electoral Reform Society has similar 
reservations.

"The Home Office is progressing quite 
slowly, which is disappointing", says Alex 
Folkes, the society's Press and Campaigns 
Officer. These are small steps in the right 
direction – however many people will still 
have to be accompanied".

"Small moves are being made in one area but 
not in others. It's a very serious issue – 
people should be able to vote privately 
unassisted. Having someone standing over 
you is a disincentive to vote.

"The Home Office seem to be offloading all 
the responsibility on to the Electoral 
Commission. I think there will be little 
impact on this election. Hopefully, they will 
look seriously at these issues for next time".

The RNIB also seem optimistic about 
changes for the election in 2005 or 2006. "We 
imagine the next election will be very 
different with a promotional campaign, more 
people registering to vote by post and a move 
towards electronic voting", Ryan says.

At this year's general election a voluntary 
survey will issued to the administrators and 
returning officers so that the feedback can be 
used by the Electoral Commission. One 
question covers the effectiveness of the tactile 
voting device.

"The general consensus is that if everyone is 
happy with it, it will probably stay as it is", 
says Home Office spokesman Martin Ellis. 
"Electronic voting has been considered but 
obviously one factor is cost, although it has 
not been ruled out."

Scope, the national disability organisation 
whose focus is people with cerebral palsy, is 
to publish results of a nationwide survey of 
polling stations across the country for the 
Polls Apart 3 campaign. The website, 
www.pa3.org.uk is due to go live shortly. 
Scope are calling for disabled voters to 
complete a survey after they have voted to aid 
their research, and this will be made available 
from this site.

The RNIB has published a factsheet on voting 
and will also be looking for feedback on good 
and bad practice to help their campaign for 
further improvements after the election. For 
more information email 
dermot.ryan@rnib.org.uk

[Section two ends.]


SECTION THREE: MOBILE 
TECHNOLOGY
- BLUETOOTH.

A FAREWELL TO WIRES AND CABLES.
By Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk

Bluetooth, named after the 10th century 
Viking King Harald Blatand who united 
Denmark and Norway, is a wireless 
communications protocol set to revolutionise 
the way blind people can access technology 
in the home and office.

Developed by the mobile phone giant 
Ericsson and already adopted by such 
companies as IBM, Microsoft, Nokia, 
Motorola and Sony, it uses radio frequencies 
to enable a wide variety of devices to 
communicate with each other over short 
distances.

It expands the possibilities for devices to 
interact with each other way beyond the 
personal computer and its standard peripheral 
devices so that telephones, computers, 
consumer electronics, navigation systems and 
security devices can all communicate without 
the usual messing about with wires and 
cables.

In the office environment, Bluetooth will 
scrap the need for cables between pieces of 
equipment and make flexibility of ownership 
and use much more practical. And because it 
is radio-based there will be no need for the 
'lines of sight' between equipment required 
by infra-red systems.

From the point of view of blind and visually 
impaired people this means that interaction 
will be easier between specially adapted kit 
and the ordinary stuff in the office. It also 
means that you will be able to avoid the 
tedium of updating information in currently 
incompatible devices like a Braille note-taker 
and a mobile phone, so that if you update the 
address book in your phone it will update the 
note-taker simultaneously. This will mean it 
is also much easier to change devices.

At home it really will be possible for your 
remote controller to drive everything from 
your television to your cooker timer and your 
curtains. The dream of the 'smart house' will 
finally come true. This will be particularly 
important for people who find moving around 
difficult but it will also save a good deal of 
dragging ones' hands across mucky surfaces 
to find a cooker knob.

Out and about it will now be possible for 
phones to link efficiently with satellite 
navigation systems so that it will be easier to 
find out where you are and specify where you 
want to go. At the macro level this means that 
your mobile phone will be able to tell you to 
within five metres where you are and at the 
micro level, as the uptake of the technology 
improves, you will also be able to find small 
objects such as the door handle of a specified 
shop.

You will also be able to use your own hand 
held device to interrogate public information 
systems and operate a bank cash machine, 
although for the next few years you will still 
have to grab bank notes rather than down 
loading digital money into your phone.

Of course, you can put all this together so that 
as you leave the office you can turn your 
cooker on and as you stand on the platform 
waiting for a train that never comes you can 
turn it off again.

One of the most important benefits for people 
with low vision, particularly the elderly, will 
be the reduction in learning required to access 
new devices. Once you have learned how to 
operate your remote controller, your handheld 
personal assistant or your laptop you will be 
able to run all your devices as long as they 
are Bluetooth enabled. The mechanism is a 
tiny chip attached to each device, together 
with a couple of lines of enabling software 
written into each operating system.

For more information see:
http://www.bluetooth.com
and Ericsson's Bluetooth page is at:
http://www.ericsson.com/Bluetooth/

* Kevin Carey is Director of HumanITy 
(http://www.humanity.org.uk)

[Section three ends.]


SECTION FOUR: NEWS ANALYSIS
- DERA.

SPECIAL NEEDS - THE MOTHER OF 
INVENTION?
By Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

The news of the UK government's Defence 
Evaluation and Research Agency's 
involvement in developing deafblind 
technology (see news, this issue) may seem 
surprising, but such interest is not 
unprecedented and far from sentimental.

DERA, smarting from cuts in defence 
spending and in the throes of having much of 
its operations semi-privatised, faces strong 
pressure to turn brainwaves into bucks.

Furthermore special needs have often inspired 
some extremely lucrative inventions: Cassette 
tapes were first designed to provide a medium 
for talking books; Alexander Graham Bell 
was moved to develop the telephone as a way 
to communicate with his partially deaf wife; 
Meanwhile, Josiah Wedgewood, the man who 
gave his name to a world famous pottery, is 
often said to have invented the revolutionary 
kick-wheel to overcome a problem with his 
leg. Some even contend that the idea of the 
biro came about as a way to stop visually 
impaired people knocking over inkpots.

In July the Ministry of Defence is scheduled 
to spin-off most of DERA's activities into a 
company called QinetiQ (pronounced 
'kinetic') Plc. This new company, though still 
part-owned by the state, will operate on a 
fully commercial basis. Meanwhile the 
smaller military-research side of DERA will 
change its name to the Defence Science and 
Technology Laboratory but will remain under 
MoD control.

When the DERA demerger occurs DERA's 
existing assistive technology projects, 
including the newly funded deafblind project, 
will fall under QinetiQ's control. Should a 
product based on ideas arising from the 
research catch on, either as an aid to 
deafblind, or in a non-deafblind applications, 
the potential profits from intellectual property 
rights could be enormous. QinetiQ's military 
background will mean it is well placed to 
market its wares to both civilian and military 
buyers, the latter being particularly generous 
early adopters of new technology.

There are many possible commercial spin-
offs from tactile interfaces, since the need to 
send messages in a tactile way can result 
from social pressure and sensory overload, 
not just from sensory impairment.

A simple tactile feature is already built into 
many mobile phones in the form of a 
vibrating 'ring'. Some people are already 
using this facility to transmit discreet phone 
messages in Morse code, according to 
BTexaCT Research (http://www.labs.bt.com).

Similar modes of communication may also 
find a place on the battlefield. Louis Braille, 
the inventor of the Braille system, developed 
the concept after learned a writing system 
called 'night writing' invented by Charles 
Barbier in the early nineteenth century for 
communicating on the battlefield in the dark.

DERA researcher Trevor Dobbins heads a 
tactile interface project which aims to find 
reliable tactile ways to relay navigational data 
from a global positioning satellite. As part of 
the research Dobbins equipped Steve 
Cunningham with gadgets allowing him to set 
the blind water-speed record of 70 mph in a 
boat on lake Windermere in October last year 
(see www.blindvision.co.uk). A month earlier 
DERA's technology helped Graham 'G-
Force' Hicks, a deafblind man, ride a pillion 
jet ski from Lands End to the Isle of Scilly 
(see www.deafblinduk.org.uk/text/quadbike). 

From defence to derring-do, tactile 
technology could be one of the secrets to the 
success of the newly privatised QinetiQ.

[Section four ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-
mail eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe 
eab' in the subject header. You can list other 
email addresses to subscribe in the body of 
the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe 
eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads 
to Dan Jellinek at: dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. 
http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin may 
be reproduced in full as long as all parts 
including this copyright notice are included. 
Sections of the report may be quoted as long 
as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-
access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  
phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  
tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  
humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
