E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts.]


ISSUE 20, AUGUST 2001.

IN THIS ISSUE:

Section One: News.

Email and shopping by voice power - 'voice portal' goes live.
Half the country fails polling test - half of UK polling stations flout law.
Accessibility means prizes - Internet sites eligible for European award.
Voice recognition - advice wanted.
Word up - new accessible books for blind users of Microsoft Word.
News in brief: Talking medication; Disability direct; AOL test.

Section two: Opening the description window on digital TV.
Digital television may give audio-described programming a long-
overdue boost in the next few years.

Section three: Russian hacker enters copyright minefield.
The FBI's arrest of a Russian hacker puts digital copyright laws 
under the microscope.

Section four: Training the trainers.
Independent consultant Richard West describes the process of 
setting up a recognised benchmark for assistive technology training.

[Contents ends.] 


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

EMAIL AND SHOPPING BY VOICE POWER.

The mobile phone 'voice portal' service eckoh went live in the UK last 
month, with E-Access Bulletin as one of its first 100 trial users. The 
service allows people to use email, shop, access news, set up conference 
calls and use a range of other customisable services through voice 
commands alone.

Similar services are already running in the US, including AOLbyPhone 
which is powered by 'Quack' (http://www.quack.com). There are also 
voice-activated services to enable people to interact with their mobile 
devices such as Orange's Wildfire (http://www.wildfire.com). But 
eckoh is Europe's first 'comprehensive voice portal'.

Online media specialist 365.com, eckoh's creator, has struck deals with 
Dominos Pizza, Virgin Wines, the bookmakers William Hill, Teleflorist, 
Ticketmaster and HMVDirect for online shopping. When you access these 
services through eckoh you leave the 'site' for the respective call centres 
of the services providers but can return to the eckoh portal at any time at 
the touch of a key.

To navigate around the service keywords are spoken. Menus are read out 
to you (by a choice of 'characters' including a gangster and an au pair) or 
if you know the keywords already you can speak them at any time. Some 
keywords are universal such as 'home' that will take you back to the 
home menu from anywhere.

There are some annoyances - at one stage the service reads through a 
tediously long privacy statement, and occasionally external noises (such 
as a door shutting) are picked up as attempted commands.

A good feature, however, is that you have the option to key in the first 
four letters of a command using the standard three letters per key system 
for phones, so you don't have to sit in a public place like a train speaking 
odd words into your handset like a lunatic.

The main problem is simply that it takes some time to get used to eckoh's 
menus and commands. Once these are mastered, however, the service 
works smoothly enough. Full details at:
http://www.eckoh.com


HALF THE COUNTRY FAILS POLLING TEST.

Almost half the polling stations in the UK failed to comply with a new 
law to make it easier for visually impaired people to vote in this year's 
General Election, according to new research sponsored by disability 
organisation Scope (http://www.scope.org.uk).

According to 'Polls Apart 3', an online survey of around 2,000 polling 
stations in 474 constituencies, some 49 per cent of polling stations did not 
provide a tactile voting template as required by the Representation of the 
People Act.

Even when the devices were supplied, "staff often did not know how to 
use them or where they were", said Scope campaigns officer Ruth Scott. 
"One device was actually faulty and if it had been used it would have 
caused a vote for the wrong candidate."

There had been a marked improvement in providing disabled access to the 
ballot since 1997, Scott said, but there was still a lot of work to do.

The Electoral Commission, the body in charge of overseeing the electoral 
process, has said it will consider the findings. The commission's post-
election report is at:
http://www.electoral-commission.gov.uk/publications.htm

Meanwhile the US Federal Election Commission has produced a draft 
report containing accessibility standards for computer-based voting 
systems. See:
http://www.fec.gov/pages/vss/062801vss.html


ACCESSIBILITY MEANS PRIZES.

Accessible websites and accessibility aids will be eligible for nomination 
to the 'Breaking barriers' awards to be held as part of this year's 
European Day of Disabled People on 3 December.

For the past nine years, the European Commission and the European 
Disability Forum have hosted the day to raise awareness of issues 
affecting disabled people.

This year's theme is 'Design for all', and the awards will fall into three 
categories: home and daily living; travel and leisure; and work and the 
workplace. To make a nomination or for further information contact 
Andre Wilkens andre.wilkens@ogilvy.be

And the European Disability Forum's new web site, with further details of 
the awards, other activities related to the December day and the planned 
European Year of Disabled citizens in 2003, is at:
http://www.edf-feph.org

Meanwhile Dr Leonard Kasday of the Institute on Disabilities at Temple 
University, Philadelphia has been given a 'Lifetime achievement award' 
by the International Coalition of Access Engineers and Specialists 
(ICAES) for the development of a tool to check web accessibility. The 
WAVE Web Page Accessibility Checker 
(http://www.temple.edu/inst_disabilities/piat/wave) is widely used by US 
government agencies to check their sites.

Other winners include AbleTV (http://www.abletv.net), an online video 
and multimedia portal for people with disabilities which includes audio-
description for blind users. The DAISY Consortium, National Information 
Standards Organization (NISO) and Open e-Book (OEB) Forum were 
also rewarded for their work developing electronic talking books.

A full list of winners is at:
http://128.104.23.133/icaes/072601_press.htm


VOICE RECOGNITION - ADVICE WANTED.

A request for advice from our readers on voice recognition software has 
been sent in by Gill Burrington of Burrington Partnership.

She says: "I am currently using IBM's voice recognition software 
ViaVoice for dictation and read-back, which is all right as far as it 
goes. However, I really need a totally hands-free system. I want to 
able to navigate my computer, open documents, open other programmes 
than Word, and even read the dialogue boxes which tell me that I made 
mistakes! I also want to be able to navigate the Internet and to dictate
email and email addresses straight into Microsoft Outlook Express.

"I am told that NaturallySpeaking from Dragon Systems 
(http://www.dragonsys.com) is more flexible than ViaVoice, but I do not 
want to make any more costly mistakes.

"Ideally I would like text-to-speech, dictation, and Internet navigation that 
work well together. and are not outrageously expensive. Help or advice 
from readers will be most welcome." Please send advice or suggestions to 
the bulletin's editor Dan Jellinek on dan@headstar.com to forward to Gill 
and publish in our next issue.


WORD UP.

Two new accessible format books for blind users of Microsoft Word have 
been produced by the Boston, Massachusetts-based non-profit Braille 
publishers the National Braille Press (http://www.nbp.org).

For complete newcomers to Word the fourth edition of 'Word for 
Windows, quick and easy' by Christian Crumlish has appeared in an 
accessible edition by Sharon Monthei. It includes advice on how to create, 
save, and print your first Word document in short self-contained lessons.

For more experienced users of the programme there is 'Word Wise 2000 - 
an intermediate guide for blind users', also by Monthei. In her 
introduction she says: "I fell in love with my computer the day I 
discovered it took the drudgery out of writing and editing, so I could focus 
on the fun part: creating. Unfortunately, as computer programs have 
become more sophisticated, some of the drudgery has returned. In too 
many cases, features intended to assist the user simply complicate the task 
of writing."

Both books take the user through the complex procedure required to 
disable the graphical pop-up help feature called Office Assistant, which 
does not always work well with speech or Braille, and often appears 
without warning, causing confusion.

The books cost 18 and 22 US dollars respectively and are available in 
Braille, large print, ASCII disk, or 'PortaBook' - a Grade 2 Braille file on 
disk that is formatted to be read easily with any portable device that can 
handle Braille files or a computer with a Braille display (for more 
information on PortaBook see http://www.nbp.org/portafaq.html).

Orders from outside the US are accepted but payments must be in dollars. 
Please email enquiries on postage fees to orders@nbp.org


NEWS IN BRIEF:

TALKING MEDICATION: Talking Rx, a device which attaches to 
medicine bottles and records verbal dosage instructions given by a 
pharmacist or GP, has been released in the US:
http://www.talkingrx.com

DISABILITY DIRECT: A new US government web portal on 
services for people with disabilities is being developed as part of 
President Bush's 'New Freedom Initiative'. It is due to go live in 
October at:
http://www.disability.direct.gov

AOL TEST: Registered users of the online service provider AOL 
have been invited to test the accessibility of a new version of the 
service's software. Those interested should enter the keyword 
'Beta' in their AOL browser, select the 'AOL 7.0 Beta' link and 
then 'focus tests'.

[Section One ends.]


SECTION TWO: TECHNOLOGY
- DIGITAL TELEVISION.

OPENING THE DESCRIPTION WINDOW ON DIGITAL TV.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

Digital television could give audio-described programming a long-
overdue boost in the next few years, a welcome development for the 
visually impaired. Audio-description is the addition of a new sound 
channel with verbal descriptions of visual elements of television 
programmes, greatly enhancing the experience of blind people.

However the transition may not be an easy one, generating new 
potential accessibility as a range of different types of digital set-top 
boxes and digital TV sets offer a variety of more or less accessible 
ways to decode digital channels as they are broadcast.

In some countries traditional analogue television has been used to 
transmit audio description as far back as 1983, when Japanese state 
broadcaster NTV began running audio-described programmes in 
off-peak hours. Subsequently Spain's Televisión de Cataluña made 
occasional audio-described broadcasts on its free-to-air television 
channel towards the end of the 1980s.

Serious consideration of audio description in Europe had to wait 
until the completion of a European Commission-funded study 
called Auditel. But while Europe pondered, the Boston-based public 
broadcaster WGBH was already producing up to 10 hours of audio-
descriptions a day - see:
http://main.wgbh.org/wgbh/access/dvs/

WGBH's headstart came thanks to a quirk of the long-established 
US analogue cable network: each TV channel has a second audio 
channel which, although not high fidelity, can be used to overlay 
audio description. Through the public service network the channel 
reaches around 50 per cent of US homes.

In the UK and most other European countries there was no suitable 
readymade multichannel infrastructure in place, and the first wave 
of analogue satellite services had no second audio channel either. 
Consequently the wholesale delivery of audio description had to 
wait for the advent of digital television.

In preparation for the dawn of the digital age, in 1998 the UK's 
Independent Television Commission issued guidelines for 
commercial broadcasters on the proportion of digital terrestrial 
programming which should carry audio description. Within 10 
years, the commission said, some ten percent of programmes should 
comply, with a series of lesser targets set down for the interim 
period. The BBC, which regulates itself, has agreed to meet similar 
quotas.

In June this year BSkyB, the UK's dominant digital television 
company, launched a channel providing audio descriptions of its 
own programming. Sky's recent compliance with the ITC code (see 
E-Access Bulletin, June 2001) has meant most access campaigners 
are generally satisfied that UK broadcasters are meeting their 
quotas. But other fundamental access problems remain.

Initially the biggest bugbear was that the first generation of digital 
set-top boxes were not designed to pick up the audio-description 
channels. Though new set top boxes or modified versions of the old 
ones have been made to play the audio track, they still do not make 
it easy to navigate the hundreds of channels on offer.

This has meant that blind and visually impaired people often miss 
out on programmes broadcast with audio description. The complex 
schedules associated with digital television is displayed in the form 
of an on screen electronic programme guide (EPG).

BSkyB has made an effort to overcome this problem by distributing 
its schedule by email, but this is believed to be a makeshift solution 
by many. To subscribe send a blank email to: diginews-epg-
subscribe@yahoogroups.com

Access campaigners hope a more satisfactory remedy is on its way 
with the introduction of software driven set top boxes. The RNIB is 
now working with Sony and Nokia to help develop the software-
based operating systems that will appear in their next generation 
set-top boxes. Because the systems are software rather than 
hardware based there is hope that access problems can be tackled 
continually as they are identified.

Nokia's Linux-based box, called the MediaTerminal, will launch in 
Sweden later this spring and come to the UK next year. It promises 
to provide a means of viewing and storing digital television, radio 
together with a gateway to full Internet access. And because its 
Linux operating system will make it open source, such 
developments can be made openly by third-parties.

But such advanced technology is unlikely likely to come cheap. The 
Nokia box itself is expected to cost in the region of 400 UK pounds; 
and if the television and computer technology markets do converge 
as widely expected, accessible software that really works is likely to 
come at a premium.

[Section two ends.]


SECTION THREE: NEWS ANALYSIS
- E-BOOKS.

RUSSIAN HACKER ENTERS COPYRIGHT MINEFIELD.
by Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

Digital copyright law, not generally front page news, hit the 
headlines last month following the FBI's arrest of Russian hacker 
Dmitry Sklyarov for telling people how to bypass Adobe's eBook 
copyright protection system.

Part of the novelty was that hackers, a sedentary bunch, felt strongly 
enough about the case to get out of their swivel chairs and take to 
the streets. Sklyarov's arrest following a presentation to the 
'DefCon Nine' hackers' conference in Las Vegas 
(http://www.defcon.org) violated freedom of speech, they said, 
because he was being locked up not for actual copyright piracy but 
for presenting legitimate research. For its part the FBI believes 
propagating this kind of knowledge is a breach of the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).

The rights and wrongs of the Sklyarov case, which may turn out to 
be the first criminal prosecution under the DMCA, are complex, all 
the more so because of the defendant's somewhat questionable 
motives. Among his dubious claims to fame are programs to harvest 
email addresses off the Internet for companies to use to send junk 
emails and programmes to 'recover passwords'.

Whatever the case's complications, it clearly illustrates one fact: e-
books are already a potent symbol for free speech advocates, just 
like their paper predecessors. And, in criticising certain aspects of 
the DMCA, the case has also led many people to disregard other 
more positive aspects of the US law.

Visually impaired people and the organisations that support them 
are exempted from the copyright restrictions. Section 17 of the law 
states that: "it is not an infringement of copyright for an authorised 
entity to reproduce or to distribute copies . . . of a previously 
published, non-dramatic literary work if such copies . . . are 
reproduced or distributed in specialised formats exclusively for the 
use of the blind or other persons with disabilities."

Thanks to this exemption, a US company called Bookshare 
(http://www.bookshare.org) has been able to start planning a web-
based service to allow people with disabilities and the organisations 
that help them to share copyright works freely. By pooling digital 
copies of books Bookshare hopes it can reduce the inconvenience 
and cost of scanning books.

To ensure the only people able to read the books are those entitled 
to do so under the law, Bookshare uses digital certificates issued by 
medical professionals or by approved bodies such as the National 
Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped and the 
Library of Congress. As part of the arrangement Bookshare and the 
copyright authorities are required to constantly scan the Internet for 
the illegal distribution of e-books bearing a Bookshare digital 
watermark.

The National Library for the Blind has contacted Bookshare about 
working on similar services in the UK. However unlike US law, UK 
copyright law does not make any specific exceptions for the use of 
copyright material by visually impaired people. Despite the 
difficulties, NLB Electronic Services Manager David Egan says: 
"We are working hard across the sector in the UK to ensure we can 
be part of this if at all feasible." 

According to Egan, the Sklyarov case shows that "the problem of 
inaccessible standards and the vigour with which the companies 
defend remains real." Some progress has been made already, he 
says, with the addition of some local history e-books to the NLB 
web site. But he says digital books "represent a complex area and 
we need to keep on chipping away at the obstacles as they arise."

* The UK government has published a consultation paper on 
copyright law and the visually impaired at:
http://www.patent.gov.uk/about/consultations/visually_impaired

[Section three ends.]


SECTION FOUR: ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY
- CERTIFICATION.

TRAINING THE TRAINERS.
by Richard West  rwest@gtnet.gov.uk

Over the past few years research by the RNIB with the British 
Computer Association of the Blind has uncovered worrying 
evidence of an urgent need to improve the standard and quality of 
assistive technology training. This is particularly important when 
training is provided through such government schemes as 'Access 
to work', but is also vital for the increasing number of people who 
have to pay for training themselves.

More than 90% of those surveyed in the course of the research felt a 
certification scheme for trainers would be beneficial, though many 
said the objective was too difficult to achieve.

Rising to the challenge, the two organisations set up the BCAB 
Trainer Certification Scheme earlier this year, to ensure assistive 
technology training programmes meet the needs of visually 
impaired people (see E-Access Bulletin, December 2000).

Having reached this agreement in principle, a small working group 
was assembled comprising experts and representatives from the 
industry. The group drew up a comprehensive list of competencies 
and duties of a trainer, together with an outline of a proposed 
scheme.

Arrangements were next made with the Institute of IT Training 
(IITT) to adopt an accessible version of their training Delivery 
Skills Refresher course and negotiations commenced with 
developers of assistive technology products to ensure assessment of 
a trainer's product knowledge was founded on the key features of 
each product.

Training skills will be covered through attending The IITT three-
day training Delivery Skills Refresher course for applicants who 
already have training experience or a five-day Training Delivery 
Course for those new to training. Successful participation on either 
course will lead to the award of a nationally recognised certificate 
in training skills.

Product knowledge will be assessed through scenario-based written 
work, requiring the trainer to prepare a full training course outline 
programme, plus a detailed script for a twenty minute training 
session. This will be followed by a short demonstration training 
session and interview. Both elements will be assessed by a qualified 
assessor and expert visually impaired user, working from a detailed 
product feature list agreed with the developers. Successful 
performance leads to a certificate in product knowledge for the 
product. This is repeated for each product for which the trainer 
wishes to be certified.

A successful applicant therefore receives certification for both 
training skills and product knowledge of one or more products. The 
trainer will be registered on the BTCS list of certified trainers, will 
sign a professional Code of Practice and be subject to maintaining a 
high level of professionalism, including keeping skills and 
knowledge up-to-date.

Visually impaired people seeking training will therefore be able to 
approach BTCS to obtain information on suitably qualified trainers 
in their area. For the first time, the Department for Education and 
Skills will be able to stipulate that training provided for students or 
under the Access to Work Scheme must be provided by a person 
who has BTCS certification.

The first course under the scheme is scheduled for September this 
year, and there will be at least one course a month thereafter.

The anticipated cost to applicants for the IITT three-day course plus 
certification on one product is 1,000 UK pounds.  The cost of the 
IITT five-day course plus certification on one product is 1,500 
pounds. The cost of each subsequent product assessment is 250 
pounds. Attempts are being made to register BTCS for Individual 
Learning Accounts, which could lead to a reduction in cost to the 
certified trainer.

For the future it is planned to produce a similar certification scheme 
for assessors of the technology needs of visually impaired people. It 
is also known that other countries, including the US, and New 
Zealand are interested in the trainer certification scheme, with 
negotiations commencing shortly.

Developing and establishing BTCS has been a lengthy, costly and 
sometimes difficult process.  However, the scheme produced is 
effective and workable and sets strong new standards for training 
visually impaired people.

* Richard West is an independent consultant. For further 
information about the certification scheme email 
BTCS@bcab.org.uk or visit http://www.btcs.org.uk

[Section four ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail eab-subs@headstar.com 
with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please encourage all 
your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin may 
be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this copyright notice 
are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as long as they are 
clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is 
also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 


[Issue ends.]
