* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site (including archive):
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid to those using screen readers, all headings 
begin with an asterisk and end with a full stop. Please let us know if there 
is anything else we could do to make navigation of the bulletin easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 24, DECEMBER 2001.

* CONTENTS.

News:

Mobile industry convenes access group
- first meeting in January.

Funding for online learning centre
- NLB receives 120,000 pound grant.

Support promised for Lernout& Hauspie users
- MediaGold to honour undertaking made before bankruptcy.

CAST breaks free mould
- users must pay for accessibility checker.

Book 'Forager' service launched
- a site to help people browse.

Back to basics
- accessible Windows taped.

News in brief: Train operator wins award; Cambridge workshop; Open 
source browser tests.

Section two: 'The Inbox' readers forum
- feedback sought on screen-reader; sound-card conflict; document 
indexing.

Section three: free software
- Linux: The day of the GNU.

Section four: education
- Early development: The toddler's interactive toy box.

Section five: Overview
- Accessible gaming: Games without frontiers.

[Contents end.]


* SECTION ONE - NEWS.

* MOBILE INDUSTRY CONVENES ACCESS GROUP.

The first ever pan-industry mobile phone accessibility working group is 
to hold its inaugural meeting in January, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

The group is to be hosted by Vodafone, with its initial members to be all 
the mobile phone operators with a UK presence, namely BT Cellnet, 
One2One, Orange and Vodafone. Subsequently mobile network 
operators from other countries will be invited to join, along with handset 
manufacturers, to create a global organisation.

Mike Duxbury, disability access manager at Vodafone and the driving 
force behind the project, says the group will take a concerted but realistic 
look at "what we can do, not just what people want us to do" in making 
mobile phone networks and handsets more accessible to people with 
disabilities.

This tone of realism was echoed by Nancy Valley, special markets and 
accessible products manager with mobile handset manufacturer 
Motorola, when she addressed last month's RNIB Techshare conference.

"Motorola is unlikely to reach a stage where it can guarantee that all 
products will be accessible for everyone," Valley said. "We can't can't 
pack everything into a product at a price people can afford. So we look to 
create a range of products."

Accessible features already built into some handsets include 'voice 
notes', whereby the user can record brief memos or instructions; text that 
can be magnified; and voice activation for number dialling, though some 
of these features are only available in the US. Fully voice-controlled 
menus "are coming", she said, although she could only promise this 
feature "within a couple of years".

Duxbury said Vodafone is also working on full text-to-speech services, 
including for SMS text messaging, but he could not offer a firm delivery 
date either. He said that to offer SMS-to-speech, compatibility issues 
would first have to be resolved between the four UK mobile operators.


* FUNDING FOR ONLINE LEARNING CENTRE.

The National Library for the Blind (http://www.nlbuk.org) has gained 
120,000 pounds of funding from the PPP Healthcare Medical Trust 
(http://www.ppptrust.org), to create a new centre for online learning 
resources for the blind and visually impaired.

VILC – the Visual Impairment Learning Centre - will create and pilot 
web-based educational resources, working in conjunction with the RNIB, 
education portal Digital Brain (http://www.digitalbrain.com) and 
VICTAR, the Visual Impairment Centre for Teaching and Research at 
the University of Birmingham 
(http://www.education.bham.ac.uk/research/victar).

The project will begin a research phase from May to summer 2002 and 
develop the first pilot resources by the middle of 2003.

VILC is one of two spin-off projects that have arisen from work by the 
NLB on a planned single web gateway to visual impairment resources, 
'Visugate'. A second spin-off project, the Visual Impairment Library of 
Research (VILOR), was announced last month as a first point of access 
for anyone with an interest in visual impairment research. The project 
will aim to construct a research 'map' which is customisable to each 
user's field of interest.

Visugate itself is set to undergo testing in Spring next year ahead of a 
planned launch date in September. The gateway will initially carry brief 
descriptions and links to around 1,500 quality-controlled online 
documents and resources held by the project's 21 partners including the 
RNIB's Research Library; Action for Blind People; The British Journal 
of Visual Impairment; and the International Centre for Eye Health.

For more information see http://www.nlbuk.org/common/Visugate.html

NOTE: The project will eventually operate from an accessible site at 
http://www.visugate.org but this is not yet live.


* SUPPORT PROMISED FOR LERNOUT & HAUSPIE USERS.

Users of speech and language software developed by the now bankrupt 
Belgian technology giant Lernout & Hauspie are to receive ongoing 
product support, according to Scansoft (http://www.scansoft.com), the 
US company which bought the assets at auction earlier this month.

The scanning software company told E-Access Bulletin this week that 
support will be provided by business development firm MediaGold 
(http://www.mediagold.com) in accordance with an arrangement 
negotiated before the software sale.

The future of the products is less certain, with Scansoft's European 
marketing director Mark Erwich unable to rule out the discontinuation of 
one or more of them. Another Scansoft representative said: "Currently, 
there are no plans in place to integrate the respective technologies. 
However, we will continue to look at possibilities where they can either 
be merged or used together."

The three main access products bought by Scansoft are Dragon Naturally 
Speaking and Voice Xpress voice recognition software, and the 
Realspeak speech-synthesiser. Lernout & Hauspie's erstwhile Kurzweil 
range of scan-and-read software did not form part of the Scansoft deal, 
having been bought out in mid-November by managers who now trade as 
Kurzweil Educational Systems (http://www.kurzweiledu.com). Among 
the directors is access technology trailblazer Ray Kurzweil.

Lernout & Hauspie, once considered to be a high-flying European hi-
tech business, was pronounced bankrupt in November 2000 by a Belgian 
court following the discovery of accounting irregularities in its Korean 
operations. In May this year the company's founders Jo Lernout and Pol 
Hauspie were detained in jail as part of an ongoing investigation into 
fraud and share price manipulation.


* CAST BREAKS FREE MOULD.

CAST, a US not-for-profit organisation promoting technology for all, has 
begun charging for downloads of its new website accessibility-checker, 
Bobby Worldwide.

Previous versions of the internationally-renowned Bobby system were 
supported by donations from major corporations and downloads were 
offered free at the CAST Web site (http://www.cast.org), where it 
remains free to check single pages.

Bobby Worldwide costs 99 dollars a user, or 3,000 dollars a server, with 
a discounted rate of 2,000 dollars a server for ten or more servers. 
Companies wishing to associate themselves explicitly with the Bobby 
campaign in promotional literature can still do so, at a price: 5,000 
dollars for a 'Booster' sponsorship package or 10,000 for a 'Booster 
Premium' package. 

"Revenue from the sale of Bobby Worldwide funds ongoing 
development, infrastructure, administrative, and support costs," 
according to the CAST web site. Bobby Worldwide's main advance on 
previous versions is that it is equipped to test sites against US 'Section 
508' legislation which requires US government sites to be accessible to 
all.


* BOOK 'FORAGER' SERVICE LAUNCHED.

An online service for blind and visually impaired people simulating the 
process of browsing through books in a library has been launched by the 
National Library for the Blind.

The NLB Book Forager is an accessible version of a system developed 
by Applied Psychology Research (http://www.youmeus.com) on behalf 
of 'Branching Out' (http://www.branching-out.net), a project run by the 
Society of Chief Librarians in England and Wales.

The NLB says the project is unusual in that it represents one of the few 
occasions when a technology has been made available to blind people at 
the same time as sighted people, and accessibility has been built up from 
the start.

A series of drop-down menus allows users to specify the level of 11 
different qualities they would like a book to have, ranging from the 
amount of sex and violence to how optimistic or realistic it should be. 
They can also specify the age, gender and sexual orientation of the main 
character.

So far, the Forager software only handles 1,000 works of fiction 
published since 1998, which are all held in grade II Braille format by the 
NLB. Once a set of characteristics has been selected the software returns 
a list of appropriate titles, and users can order them by email.

For visually impaired people, choosing books in the past has often meant 
reading synopses that give the plot away, and the need to consult with 
others may have led to more conservative choices. The new system aims 
to change that, although its creators admit it works best for extreme 
choices, and does not always work that well if too many different 
characteristics are specified together.


* BACK TO BASICS.

Access software tutorial writer John Wilson has produced a recorded 
guide to the fundamentals of Windows-based computing, 'VIPs 
introduction to computers'.

The two audio cassettes, which costs 12 pounds including postage, are 
designed to offer the information needed by those new to computing or 
just to Windows in making a decision on whether or not to buy a new 
computer system.

Just under a third of the three-hour guide is taken up with an introduction 
to the different types of computers and peripherals, in particular the 
keyboards. It then covers key Windows utilities using a variety of screen 
readers. To learn more telephone Wilson on +44 (0)113 257 5957 or 
email jwjw@onetel.net.uk


*NEWS IN BRIEF:


* TRANSPORT OF DELIGHT: The website of Translink, a major 
supplier of bus and train transport services in Northern Ireland, won one 
of four Breaking Barriers awards on the European Day of Disabled 
People on 3 December. As well as being accessible itself, the site 
provides information about the accessibility features of bus and train 
stations and facilities at each stop:
http://www.translink.co.uk

* CWUAAT'S THIS: Computer access software and accessible 
peripherals are among the topics up for discussion at 'CWUAAT', a 
workshop on universal access and assistive technologies running in 
March next year at Trinity Hall, Cambridge:
http://rehab-www.eng.cam.ac.uk/cwuaat

* MOZILLA UNLEASHED: Test versions of Mozilla, the open source 
origin of the Netscape browser, are being offered on a nightly basis to 
volunteers willing to test it for accessibility. Testers are being asked to 
concentrate on the browsers support for keyboard control and Active 
Accessibility, a Microsoft standard for programmes to communicate with 
access aids.
For more on Mozilla see:
http://www.mozilla.org
And to download the latest test version visit:
http://ftp.mozilla.org/pub/mozilla/nightly/latest/mozilla-win32-
installer.exe

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO - 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

* SOFTWARE ASSESSMENT: Andy Berry, a rehabilitation worker at 
Lewisham Council, writes to ask if any bulletin readers have experience 
of using the 'LookOUT' screen reader or Magnice screen magnifier, 
from Choice Technology (http://www.screenreader.co.uk). [Respond to: 
inbox@headstar.com]

* CONFLICT RESOLITION: Katy Dymoke from Touchdown Dance 
emailed to say responses to her request run in our October issue 
confirmed that the demands put on computer sound-cards by music on a 
CD-ROM may conflict with the voice synthesizer software used by 
screen readers. Dymoke said that in future she would make the 
possibility of such problems clear by listing system requirements for full 
accessibility on the case of the CD-ROM. Like Andy Berry above, 
Dymoke is also now interested to learn about the LookOUT screen-
reader. [Respond to: inbox@headstar.com]

* DIGITAL INDEXING: In answer to last month's request from 
Anthony Bernard of Sri Lanka for ideas on software that can be used to 
index books he had scanned on to CD, teacher Val Lawson wrote: "Have 
you thought of using Adobe Acrobat? I believe that Version 5 supports 
screen readers." [Further ideas to: index@headstar.com]

[Section two ends.]


* SECTION THREE: FREE SOFTWARE
- LINUX.

* THE DAY OF THE GNU.
by Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com

The use of free software like the Linux operating system is not 
widespread by visually impaired people, partly due to a general focus of 
access technology development on Microsoft Windows. But this could 
soon be set to change, with growing realisation of the high accessibility, 
affordability and flexibility of free software.

Many people equate free software with open source software, but not all 
open source software is 'free', as defined by Richard Stallman's Free 
Software Foundation (http://www.fsf.org).

Stallman is also the developer of GNU, a free operating system which 
was combined with a core or 'kernel' called Linux to form GNU/Linux 
(commonly referred to simply as Linux).

The free software definition (http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-
sw.html) which applies to software developed under the 'GNU General 
Public License' (and protected by a legally binding system called 
'copyleft', a sort of anti-copyright) is emphatically about much more 
than cost: 'free as in freedom' is the preferred mantra. Indeed, free 
software can be sold, if people can find ways of adding value for 
example through writing manuals.

The definition has four main elements: the freedom to run the program, 
for any purpose (freedom 0); the freedom to study how the program 
works, and adapt it (freedom 1); the freedom to redistribute copies 
(freedom 2); and the freedom to improve the program, and release your 
improvements to the public (freedom 3). Access to software source code 
– 'open source' - is a precondition for freedoms 1 and 3.

At the RNIB's recent 'Techshare 2001' conference 
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/techshare) Janina Sajka, director of technology 
research and development at the American Foundation for the Blind 
(http://www.afb.org), said the active free software development 
community now numbers some 300,000 people worldwide.

"Free software has really taken off in the last year or so, including in the 
corporate world – IBM is spending a million dollars on Linux 
development," Sajka said. "It is often of outstanding quality."

One of the easiest ways for screen reader users to gain an idea of 
GNU/Linux is a free package called Speakup (http://www.linux-
speakup.org), she said, which works with Linux to read all the screens 
and messages aloud. It has not yet been accepted into the Linux 'kernel' 
as a default standard, but there are three versions of Linux that do come 
ready packaged with Speakup - Debian (http://www.debian.org), Red 
Hat (http://www.redhat.com) and Slackware 
(http://www.slackware.com).

"With Speakup, a blind person or a deafblind person using Braille TTY 
[teletypewriter] output can install and configure a computer operating 
system from scratch for the first time," Sajka said.

Once Linux is installed, there is free software available to allow the user 
to carry out the whole range of tasks available to the Windows user, she 
said. Content is generally first keyed into a raw text editor and then 
formatted subsequently for output as a word processor document, web 
page or whatever, a system which boosts accessibility.

There is a free software equivalent to the Microsoft Office suite of desk-
top software packages, 'OpenOffice' (http://www.openoffice.org), a 
form of which runs on 'GNOME' (http://www.gnome.org), one of the 
major graphical interfaces for Linux. Both GNOME and OpenOffice 
have been developed by Sun Microsystems in an attempt to break 
Microsoft's hold on the desktop market.

As a point-and-click graphical environment like Windows, GNOME is 
not as accessible as the basic 'command line' form of Linux, but Sajka 
said Sun has recognised that it has to be made accessible, not least 
because under US law software must be accessible if it is to compete for 
federal contracts.

In November the 'Gnopernicus' project, led by German firm BAUM 
(http://www.baum.de), was announced to develop combined screen 
magnification and screen reader features for GNOME 
(http://developer.gnome.org/projects/gap/AT/Gnopernicus).

In Europe, another graphical interface for Linux is more commonly used 
– KDE (http://www.kde.org). This too has an accessibility project 
underway, although it is not as far down the line as the work for 
GNOME, Sajka said.

Beyond the usual desktop applications, Linux also shines in the field of 
internet and other communications, she said – "AT&T use it to run the 
world's telephone systems."

The accessibility of the command line system means that Linux is 
certainly the system of choice for blind computer programmers, she said, 
and indeed there are many blind programmers working in this field. But 
should the ordinary blind or visually impaired computer user use Linux?

"The answer today is – perhaps", Sajka said. "Anyone who used to like 
DOS will like Linux – it is very accessible. You can listen to an audio 
file or browse the web from a text command line, not a graphical 
interface. It's also very stable – it's nice to compute all day and go away 
and come back and never have to reboot. There is also increased 
flexibility – you take what you like and leave the rest.

"I think that if assistive technology were invented today, it would look 
only at Linux. This did not happen because when assistive technology 
began to be developed, UNIX [the forerunner to Linux] was not free, and 
Windows became universally used in business."

Momentum does appear to be building up behind Linux in the access 
community. Soon the DAISY digital book standard will be made 
compatible with Linux, and next year for the first time there will be a 
Linux accessibility track (co-ordinated by Sun) at the annual conference 
on 'Technologies and persons with disabilities' at California State 
University Northridge, CSUN (http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf2002).

Ultimately however, the really compelling reason why free software 
could be the future for the accessibility community is one of 
independence, she said. "With free software, lobbying the IT giants to 
make their products accessible becomes irrelevant. We don't need 
advocates, we need engineers."

NOTE: For further information on Linux and accessibility, see the 
documents section of programmer Saqib Shaikh's web site, which 
includes the 'Blinux Software Map', a superb overview of assistive 
software available:
http://www.sakibshaikh.com

See also 'The talking penguin' by programmer John Tucker, at:
http://www.poetsroads.demon.co.uk/sa/talking_computers.html

[Section three ends.]


* SECTION FOUR: EDUCATION
- EARLY DEVELOPMENT.

* THE TODDLER'S INTERACTIVE TOYBOX.
by Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

Computer games and educational programs can provide a compelling 
way for children to learn how to interact with computers. But as most 
children's software requires sight, blind or visually impaired children can 
be placed at a disadvantage.

"The problem is that most so-called text within children's software is not 
really text at all, but pictures of letters - bitmapped text - and is very 
difficult to convert to real text," says children's software developer 
Ronald Cooper. To make matters worse, even when text is not presented 
as an image, there is a dearth of screen-reading software suitable for 
children. To overcome this, Cooper's company RJ Cooper & Associates 
(http://www.rjcooper.com) is developing a screen reader for children, 
'KeyRead'.

The development process for this software has involved visiting disabled 
children in different parts of the US. The upshot of one of these visits 
was a piece of software called 'Find the Buttons', which teaches blind 
children about the concept of a graphical user interface using a mouse.

As the child moves the mouse around across different sized panels on the 
screen, different sounds are heard depending on whether the mouse 
pointer is inside or outside a panel. Entering the various panels and 
clicking leads to stories or games being run. A downloadable version of 
the software, which was developed in association with a toddler from 
New Jersey called Jimmy, can be found at:
http://www.rjcooper.com/find-the-buttons

Though unusual, Cooper's products are not the only ones to address the 
needs of the visually impaired child.

In an attempt to equip visually impaired children with keyboard skills, R-
E-M (http://www.r-e-m.co.uk/specialneeds) manufactures pre-reading 
software such as the 'concept keyboard', where different keys make 
different sounds when they are pressed. The company also produces 
software and equipment such as accessible switches that are helpful aids 
for preschool children using computers.

The Northern Grid for Learning (http://www.northerngrid.org), a 
consortium of education authorities in the north of England, has recently 
produced a free piece of educational developmental software suitable for 
children from toddlers to young adults to help parents and teachers to 
assess which visual imagery is most stimulating for them. Called the 
SENSwitcher, the software selects combinations of contrasting colours 
and shapes and records the child's responses. Through interaction it aims 
to provide an enjoyable way for children to learn cause and effect.

Recently, the world-renowned Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT) Media Lab has entered the field too, with a prototype 
sophisticated technological toy called the 'Bricket' 
(http://llk.media.mit.edu/projects/bricket), a sort of intelligent building 
block that has sensors and can emit sounds. At the heart of each block is 
a small, programmable microcomputer onto which programs written on a 
computer using screen-reading software and the simple LOGO 
programming language can be downloaded. The Bricket can then control 
and interact with a large variety of sensors, for example playing a song 
when someone walks though a door.

The Bricket is not exclusively designed for children, although MIT 
scientists have already found that bricks with brains can assist visually 
impaired children play, develop and learn with computer enhanced Lego:
http://el.www.media.mit.edu/groups/el/projects/legologo

MIT graduate student Rahul Bhargava hopes the Bricket will become 
useful as a learning tool: "The experience of building computational 
constructions is rich in small challenges that require hard thinking to 
overcome. The idea of computation should by no means be limited to the 
computer and its screen interface. I hope to adapt this technology to 
provide the blind and visually impaired with a new way of understanding 
the power of computation."

[Section four ends.]


* SECTION FIVE: OVERVIEW
- ACCESSIBLE GAMING.

* GAMES WITHOUT FRONTIERS.
by Saqib Shaikh  ss@saqibshaikh.com

The idea of using a computer to play games dates back to the 1980s, 
when adventure games were popular. Because these games were text-
based, blind people were able to play, but as computers developed 
companies began increasingly to produce games relying on visuals.

This trend meant that until a few years ago, text-based adventure games 
remained almost the only games playable by a blind person. To this day 
there is still a small, but active community of text-based games 
enthusiasts, both archiving old and developing new adventures. Two of 
the biggest collections of these can be found at ftp://ftp.gmd.de/if-archive 
and http://interactivefiction.about.com

In the late 1990s a New Jersey based company called Personal Computer 
Systems (PCS http://www.pcsgames.com) began to break the mould with 
the launch of a range of sound- and text- driven games running on the 
DOS operating system. The games ranged from card and board games to 
sports and action games, including a car racing game.

In the years that followed, blind people, along with most other people, 
began to migrate to Windows. PCS met this growing market by 
converting their games to Windows and recording sound files to replace 
the textual information that had previously been read out by a DOS 
screen reader.

These games were still relatively static and crude compared to their 
mainstream counterparts, but over the past year or two there have been 
further major advances.

The first attempt at making more exciting games for Windows was by 
gamesfortheblind.com (http://www.gamesfortheblind.com). This 
company produced a variety of games, including card games, educational 
games and a version of Battleships. Originally the programs were written 
to interface with the JAWS screen-reader, but more recent versions also 
work with WindowEyes, and the company is now working on producing 
self-voicing versions that use the Eloquence software synthesiser. 
Gamesfortheblind.com also produced the first accessible game that can 
be played over the Internet, StarFight 
(http://www.gamesfortheblind.com/aig/star.html). This is a version of 
Battleships using spaceships rather than boats. Users log onto a chat 
server and find an opponent to play remotely.

Last year computer-based entertainment was revolutionised with the 
launch of a Wild West game called Grizzly Gulch from Bavisoft 
(http://www.bavisoft.com). It is self-voicing, and uses stereo sound clips 
to produce a life-like atmosphere. Your mission is to prevent a crime to 
impress the sheriff, after which the sheriff will send you on bounty 
missions.

Throughout the game your main task is to fight off baddies by engaging 
in gun-fights. You will hear them taunting you from different directions, 
and you must turn to shoot them. In some scenes you will also hear 
frightened bystanders, who you must try not to shoot.

There is also a casino, where you can play games such as slot machines, 
Poker, Blackjack or the shell game, where there are three shells, with a 
coin hidden under one. One of the outer shells is swapped with the 
central shells repeatedly, and at the end you must guess where the coin 
is. This is represented by hearing a sound playing to the left when the left 
shell is exchanged and a noise to the right when the right shell is 
exchanged. You must concentrate hard and follow the exchange.

Another company which has recently entered the blind gaming arena is 
GMA Games (http://www.gmagames.com), with Lone Wolf and Trek 
2000. The former is a World War II game in which you pilot a submarine 
by listening to the sound of the motors and sensors. One particularly nice 
feature of this game is that as well as being able to play predefined 
missions, players can create their own missions, and a few player-defined 
missions are included on the GMA web site. Trek 2000 is based on Star 
Trek, and again play is accomplished through sound effects and signals 
from sensors.

GMA recently released a third game which many, including myself, 
believe is the best accessible game released to date - Shades Of Doom, 
an audio version of the popular Doom game (for a full description of this 
game see 'Biological warfare', section five, E-Access Bulletin November 
2001).

Another company producing games for the blind is ESP Softworks 
(http://www.espsoftworks.com). They recently released their first game, 
ESP Pinball. This game is based on the classic pinball table, with each 
level having a new theme, such as Pacman or soccer. As you play you 
can hear the ball rolling around from the left to the right. Different sound 
effects are used to symbolise different events. For example, in the 
Pacman table there are different sounds to signal that food has appeared 
or is being eaten, or to indicate the position of ghosts.

You knock the ball up the table by flipping the paddles. Every so often 
the ball will stop rolling - maybe when it is caught against a bumper - 
and then a scan will start. You will hear a beeping while the board is 
scanned from 9 o'clock to 3 o'clock and round. During the scanning you 
will hear the sounds for objects found, at which point you can hit the 
paddle and send the ball rolling off again. Beware, however, that if a 
ghost is hiding behind something it won't be picked up during the scan!

ESP also has a demo of their second game on their site, which is soon to 
be released: Monkey Business, an arcade style game. Plans for a 
teleportation device have been stolen from your boss by undercover 
monkeys controlled by the evil Dr Wobble. On each level you must catch 
all the monkeys and retrieve the pages of the plan, assisted by a co-
ordinate reader and object detector.

Finally, there are two more companies which have made an entry into the 
blind gaming arena. Educational software company MindsEye2 
(http://www.mindseye2.com) has released a children's audio crossword 
puzzle. And second, there is Zform (http://www.zform.com), a non-profit 
organisation that aims to produce games that can be enjoyed by both 
blind and sighted gamers alike. They have not yet started development 
on their first game, a medieval chess game with audio effects that can be 
played over the Internet, but estimate it should take around a year to 
develop.

With the long-awaited release of a second title from Bavisoft also due 
out early in the New Year – this time based in a haunted village – and a 
new car-racing game due out from ESP, it seems blind computer gaming 
is finally coming of age.

[Section five ends.]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You 
can 
list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please 
encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com
The Bulletin may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this 
copyright notice are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-
accessibility.com is also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
