E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the 
Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts]

ISSUE 13, JANUARY 2001.

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News.
- Open University launches UK's largest 
assistive learning technology centre; US 
government sets standards for access; Listen to 
IVAN; Nystagmus and computer use; Immersion 
wins us patent for tactile web; A double first for 
universal design; Training course for powerpoint 
presentations.

Section Two: Special Focus
- Deafblindness.

Section Three: Case Study
- 'Sort It!'.

Section Four: Technology
- 'vOICe'.

[Contents ends.]


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

OPEN UNIVERSITY LAUNCHES UK'S 
LARGEST ASSISTIVE LEARNING 
TECHNOLOGY CENTRE.

The Open University is to create a Centre for 
Assistive Technology and Enabling Research 
(CATER) for disabled students, backed by one 
million UK Pounds from the Higher Education 
Funding Council for England, in the largest 
project of its kind so far in the UK.

The OU is Britain's largest university, with more 
than 200,000 students undertaking its part-time 
distance learning courses. Currently more than 
7,000 of its students have disabilities, and the 
numbers are growing.

CATER will build on and develop the 
University's existing work on assistive 
technologies to facilitate the learning of disabled 
students.

This will include developing learning resources 
and communication methods; developing new 
technology based services for students; carrying 
out research to ensure that these services remain 
appropriate to the needs of disabled learners; 
technical support; and the creation of an Access 
Centre to conduct needs assessments for disabled 
students and staff and provide advice and 
training on equipment.

Specific projects will include further 
development of the university's ongoing 
DREAM (Digitally Recorded Educational Audio 
Materials) project to replace analogue audio 
recording of course materials with digital 
recording, to enhance their quality, interactivity 
and accessibility.

The university is looking to recruit a person to 
head the new centre. The appointment is initially 
for a three-year period, after which the HEFCE 
funding runs out, so an important part of the job 
will be to generate income to enable the centre's 
continuation.

The post has a salary range of 32,000-37,000 UK 
Pounds, and t he closing date for application is 
30 January 2001. Further information from 
01908 858251 or contact Liz McCarthy on 
01908 653044 for further particulars in large 
print, computer disk, or audio cassette. 
Applicants who are deaf or hard of hearing can 
call a Minicom answerphone on 01908 654901.

There is also further information at:
http://www.open.ac.uk/employment


US GOVERNMENT SETS STANDARDS FOR 
ACCESS.

The US Access Board, an independent agency 
that promotes access to services by people with 
disabilities across the whole of US federal 
government, has issued new accessibility 
standards for information technology and 
consumer electronics.

The standards have been produced under a 1998 
amendment to section 508 of the Rehabilitation 
Act, which strengthened existing provisions 
covering access to government information. The 
finalised standards, issued in December 2000 
following a consultation process, are legally 
binding and will become part of the Federal 
Acquisition Regulations.

The standards apply to the full range of 
technologies used by US government 
departments and agencies, including the design 
of web sites. Technology developed or acquired 
for a federal agency by a contractor must also 
comply. However, the standards carry a rider 
clause: "A federal agency does not have to 
comply with the technology accessibility 
standards if it would impose an undue burden to 
do so."

The Access Board is now developing training 
materials to help people understand and comply 
with the new standards, including fact sheets, 
practical 'how-to' tips on making web sites 
accessible to people with disabilities, and 
comprehensive annotated lists of reference 
materials.

Further information at:
http://www.access-board.gov/news/508-
final.htm


LISTEN TO IVAN.

In the latest development in the voice-activated 
web arena, a character called IVAN – Intelligent 
Voice Animated Navigator - could help blind 
people navigate the Internet without a keyboard.

Users of IVAN describe aloud the topic they are 
interested in and the navigator – a cartoon icon 
that looks like a little globe with arms and legs - 
will find relevant websites, verbally list them and 
guide the searcher through them. If IVAN 
doesn't understand what you're looking for, it 
will ask for clarification.

Users need to download a piece of free software 
over the web and buy a compatible headset with 
microphone. You may already own a headset – 
the 'FAQ' section of the 'myIVAN' web site has 
details of compatibility. Once you're plugged in, 
IVAN will run a short training session to help 
him understand the nuances of your voice.

Its developer, US-based One Voice 
Technologies, says IVAN works on mobile 
telephones and other wireless appliances as well 
as PCs. See:
http://www.myivan.com/


NYSTAGMUS AND COMPUTER USE.

The Nystagmus Network is planning to compile 
an information sheet about the use of computers 
by children and others who suffer from this eye 
condition.

Nystagmus is characterised by rapid, jerky eye 
movements, and may cause difficulties in 
viewing computer screens. The network is 
seeking tips and advice from anyone with any 
experience of the condition on what sorts of 
computers and software may be easiest to use; 
and what other relevant information resources 
may exist on the web or elsewhere.

Anyone who can help should email acting 
chairman John Sanders on eyesitejs@msn.com

For further information on nystagmus, and a 
range of resources and materials including 
information for schools and information on 
treatment and research, visit the network's 
highly accessible site:
http://www.btinternet.com/~lynest/nyhome_n.ht
m


IMMERSION WINS US PATENT FOR 
TACTILE WEB.

The Immersion Corporation, developer of the 
'TouchSense' tactile computer mouse, has been 
granted a US patent for its system of enabling 
tactile 'force feedback' for web pages.

Immersion's software tools allow web 
developers to embed touch elements in a page 
that are converted by the TouchSense mouse into 
different kinds of vibration or pressure on the 
user's fingertips. They can be used on computer 
desktops and in gaming software as well as on 
the Internet, enabling users to physically 
experience interactions with menus, icons, 
windows and other web page elements.

Tactile cues range from simple pressure to 
highlight when a cursor moves over an animated 
button, to the addition of different 'textures' to 
products that are offered for sale online.

TouchSense-enabled computer mice – also 
known as 'haptic' mice - include the iFeel 
Mouse from Logitech (http://www.logitech.com) 
which uses different kinds of vibrations. Other 
TouchSense technologies work by making the 
cursor an extension of the hand.

Immersion has developed a suite of software 
tools that enables web developers to add tactile 
feedback to web pages. They are available free 
at:
http://www.immersion.com/developer/build.html


A DOUBLE FIRST FOR UNIVERSAL 
DESIGN.

CHI 2001, this year's Human Computer 
Interface conference staged by the US-based 
international Association for Computing 
Machinery, will cover topics including universal 
access and usability of technology, and the social 
implications of interface design.

It is to be held in Seattle from 30 March – 5 
April. Further information at:
http://www1.acm.org/sigchi/chi2001/

Confusingly, a second conference that claims to 
be 'the first international conference on universal 
access in human-computer interaction', UAHCI 
2001, is to be held alongside the 9th 
International Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction from August 5-10 in New Orleans.

The event aims to establish an international 
forum on research related to universal access in 
the development of interactive software. See:
http://uahci.ics.forth.gr


TRAINING COURSE FOR POWERPOINT 
PRESENTATIONS.

The British Computer Association of the Blind, 
in association with Blind in Business, is to run a 
three-day course in May introducing Microsoft 
PowerPoint 2000 to visually impaired computer 
users. The course will look at the fundamentals 
of design and creation of PowerPoint slide-show 
style presentations. For further information 
please email the administrative assistant at the 
BCAB at admin@bcab.org.uk by 14 February, 
telephone 0845 660 6234 or see:
http://www.bcab.org.uk/courses/powerpoint-
prop.htm

[Section One ends]


SECTION TWO: SPECIAL FOCUS
- DEAFBLINDNESS.

SOLUTIONS TO A COMPLEX 
COMMUNICATION PROBLEM.

The term deafblindness reflects a number of 
different states of sensory impairment. The 1988 
RNIB report 'Breaking through' defined the 
condition as "a severe degree of combined visual 
and auditory impairment, resulting in problems 
of communication, information and mobility".

It is important to remember that deafblindness is 
a disability in itself, and more than the sum of 
the parts of being visually impaired and hearing 
impaired: the effects of the hearing impairment 
modify and multiply the effects of the visual 
impairment, and vice versa.

The largest group of deafblind people are people 
aged around 65 or older who have acquired 
sensory impairments late in life and who have 
been used to an independent lifestyle. People 
who lose their hearing or sight later in life, 
particularly if they have residual hearing and 
vision, are often unlikely to label themselves as 
deafblind and may think services aimed at 
deafblind people are not relevant to them.

Other causes of deafblindness include serious 
accidents; the genetic condition Usher 
Syndrome; and congenital deafblindness 
resulting from an illness such as Rubella or due 
to prematurity.

Deafblindness has a major impact on a person's 
mobility, ability to communicate and access to 
information. Deafblind people experience the 
world very suddenly and without warning. For 
example, a deafblind person will not know that 
you are approaching them, or are near them, until 
you touch them. They will not be aware of the 
processes required to do something unless they 
are specifically shown that process, and this will 
have an impact on how they interact with the 
world.

The main factor affecting how a deafblind person 
communicates is whether they possess a spoken 
language such as English, or a non-spoken 
language such as sign language, as a first 
language.

Communication methods based on English 
include 'Block', where letters of the alphabet are 
drawn onto the deafblind person's hand with a 
finger. 'Deafblind manual' is another tactile 
language where letters of the alphabet are 
represented by touching the deafblind person's 
hand. For example, touching the top of the 
deafblind person's thumb represents the letter 
'A'.

In a high-tech twist to these manual solutions, 
some research groups are developing mechanical 
hands that can convert digital text into manual 
signs that can be felt by deafblind people as with 
a human hand, although these solutions are not 
yet available commercially.

For some people a hearing aid can help and an 
induction loop installed in a room will assist 
hearing-aid users by picking up and transmitting 
sound from the room direct to the hearing aid, 
and stripping out background noise. However, 
loops frequently suffer technical problems. It 
may be that they are not switched on and are 
used so rarely that no one knows how to activate 
them. In other cases they are not installed 
correctly and will receive interference from 
equipment such as PCs.

There are other types of hearing aid, but 
generally when speaking to someone wearing a 
hearing aid a person should not shout, but talk 
clearly and at a normal speed.

Communication methods based on other 
languages include 'restricted sign language', 
used with people who have some vision. An 
interpreter signs in a restricted space in front of 
the deafblind person in their field of vision.

With 'hands-on signing', the deafblind person 
puts their hands on the interpreter's hands while 
the interpreter signs what is being said. Again, it 
is based on standard sign language but uses a 
restricted or slightly modified version.

For face to face situations, a computer can help 
with the conversation. If the person reads Braille 
then special programs can be used to control a 
Braille display (one such is 'S-Com', developed 
by a deafblind person). The screen is split into 
two. The main part of the screen is used for the 
interpreter or speaker to type what they want to 
say. The bottom line of the screen is viewed 
using the Braille display. 

The 'Tellatouch' is a portable (but quite bulky) 
device with a QWERTY keyboard and a single 
Braille cell. In addition, computers with 
refreshable Braille displays attached can be used 
to talk to a deafblind Braille reader.

It is also possible to use a standard word 
processing program with speech and Braille 
output. This allows the better magnification 
facilities available under Windows to be used for 
people with some residual vision, and to provide 
communication using speech and Braille 
together.

One of the advantages of using a PC is that a 
sighted or visually impaired person can talk to a 
deafblind person directly without knowledge of 
specialist communication methods. It is also 
faster and less tiring than speaking through an 
interpreter.

For telephone contact a deafblind person might 
use a phone system with Braille output or a 
textphone with a large or magnified display. 
Direct conversations are possible if both people 
have a minicom or use RNID Typetalk, the 
national telephone relay service 
(http://www.rnid-typetalk.org.uk/).

A phone conversation of this kind will take 
longer than an ordinary phone call and it will 
take time to become accustomed to talking via an 
intermediary. People using a textphone to 
communicate with a deafblind person should 
think carefully about the words that they use. It 
should be remembered that the listener cannot 
pick up any voice inflexions and nuances of 
emotion may not therefore be apparent.

In all communication with deafblind people, it is 
necessary to have some options from which to 
choose the most appropriate method for the 
situation, and to have a contingency plan in case 
one method fails. For further information on 
deafblindness see James Gallagher's award-
winning 'A-Z to deafblindness' site at:
http://www.deafblind.com/

* Article by Cathy Rundle, RNIB. This article is 
adapted from a paper given at the RNIB's 
'Techshare' conference on 30 November-1 
December 2000 (see also E-Access Bulletin, 
issue 12).

[Section two ends]


SECTION THREE: CASE STUDY
- 'SORT IT!'

GIVING A VOICE TO YOUNG PEOPLE.

Blind and partially sighted children and young 
people want to watch television, read books, play 
video games, go out with friends and plan 
careers – in other words, to do all the things that 
their peer groups do.

But it may not be that easy. According to 
'Shaping the future', the first ever survey of the 
experiences of more than 1,000 visually 
impaired children aged between five and 25, one 
in three feel excluded from many classroom 
activities and more than one in four reported 
bullying.

Late last year the RNIB, which carried out the 
survey, launched a new web site aimed at 11-16 
year olds with serious sight problems to try to 
address some of these issues in an accessible 
way.

'Sort it!', at http://www.sortit.org.uk, draws 
together a range of social and educational 
resources for young people while highlighting 
the problems of visual impairment and how they 
can be dealt with.

"The feeling behind the creation of the site was 
that children and young people enjoy using the 
Internet but there's not a great deal for blind and 
visually impaired people that is fully accessible 
and fun", says Becca Bryant, RNIB 
Communications Manager and one of a small 
team charged with maintaining the site.

The site's launch generated extensive media 
interest, particularly among young people's 
magazines. As a result it is already receiving 
around two thousand hits a month.

Content includes a section headed 'Your voice', 
which explains to young people their rights 
under legislation such as the Disability 
Discrimination Act, and how to enforce them. 
There is also advice on how to obtain help at 
school, and from other sources.

A 'What's on' section includes information on 
'Let's go!', a quarterly guide to cultural events 
such as galleries where you can touch the 
exhibits, days out and holidays. 

The 'Braille trail' includes information about 
how and where to get text books and magazines 
in Braille, tape or large type. The RNIB 
publishes two magazines for 12-15 year olds - 
'Sugar and Spice' and 'Slugs and Snails' - with 
the latest celebrity gossip, pop news and sport. 
They cost 32 pence each, although they cannot 
yet be ordered online.

Interactivity is a key feature - throughout the site 
youngsters are encouraged to join mailing lists, 
enter competitions or send in their own ideas, 
comments, reviews and opinions.

The idea is that the feedback received will help 
the RNIB in future campaigns for increased use 
of Braille resources in schools, greater 
participation in sports for the blind and the need 
to give teachers in mainstream schools visual 
awareness training.

Interactive features include a message board 
where users can ask for help with homework, 
projects, share news about computer games or 
find new networks of friends to share 
experiences with.

Young people do seem to be using the board 
already to swap stories about their experiences, 
exchange ideas, and equally importantly, to let 
off steam. One typical message under the 
heading 'aaaaaaaaaah!' reads: "Hey do any of 
you guys find that teachers always ask the 
support teachers if things need enlarging? And 
they always enlarge stuff that was fine, and they 
always tell you what you can see and what you 
can't instead of asking. I HATE IT!"

The message elicited a sympathetic response: 
"Yes, it absolutely annoys me. Do they ever 
think they should ask us?"

Following the success of the message board, the 
Sort it! team has plans to set up some kind of 
live chat facility, although they currently lack the 
funds. The team is shortly to set about seeking 
corporate sponsorship for the site as a whole.

Other plans to expand the site include a section 
about careers and how to get ahead, which will 
profile successful people both with and without 
sight problems. They are also going to invite 
celebrity chefs to suggest recipes that are easy 
for blind and partially sighted people to follow.

Currently on the site Comedian Harry Hill 
recalls light-heartedly what it was like for him 
growing up with poor eyesight, and promises to 
come round and sort out the bullies at your 
school.

[Section three ends]


SECTION FOUR: TECHNOLOGY
- 'vOICe'.

CAN YOU HEAR THAT PAINTING OVER 
THERE?

The sensation of 'hearing' colours in a painting 
or the depth of a room is described by the 
volunteer developers of 'vOICe', a piece of 
'video sonification' software that creates 
'soundscapes' of a person's environment.

"The vOICe [brought] my hallway from a blurry 
image in my mind's eye to what seems like 
actual dimensional sight", says Pat Fletcher, a 
volunteer from the US who is testing the 
technology. Fletcher was blinded in later life, 
and so has memories of vision.

"It doesn't matter to me that my ears are causing 
the sight to occur in my mind. What matters is 
that the soundscapes are triggering a pathway for 
me to see again."

The vOICe system works by translating images 
from a miniature 'eye-ball' PC camera or 
webcam into sounds. Different shapes create 
different sounds and even colours sound 
different. Once a user is accustomed to the 
vOICe, they can begin to comprehend more 
complex or moving scenes simply by listening to 
them.

The system was invented by Peter Meijer, a 
senior computer chip scientist working for 
Philips Research in Holland 
(http://www.research.philips.com). The vOICe 
project is a subsidiary activity that he runs in his 
spare time and at his own expense, although 
Philips has supported him in publishing material 
related to the technology.

Fletcher is the first user to embark on fully 
immersive use of the vOICe, using a mobile set 
up and wearing it every day. For about six 
months she has been wearing a head-mounted 
webcam (sported, Cyclops-like, on the forehead), 
stereo headphones, a microphone for speech 
commands and a powerful notebook PC inside a 
backpack running the vOICe software.

She found that once she became accustomed to 
it, the system added depth to practical activities. 
In one testimony posted onto the web, she says: 
"One day I was washing the dishes and turned to 
get a towel to dry my hands. When I turned back 
to the sink, I was stunned to see it in a depth-like 
image. I stepped away from the sink and walked 
slowly up to it again to see if my mind was 
playing tricks on me. But, no, the feeling of 
seeing depth in the sink bowl was still there. I 
can now also stand in doorways of the rooms in 
my house and sense the depth of the room. I 
can't yet feel this when I am walking, but it is 
there when I am standing still."

Meijer says that because no congenitally blind 
people have so far undergone fully immersive 
trials, it is hard to say whether such users would 
experience the same sense of depth. "But if the 
sense of depth is due to visual perspective, then 
one could argue that a congenitally blind person 
might learn it just as well as a late-blinded 
person," he says. "Visual perspective is a matter 
of optics, governed by physical laws and 
mathematical rules. There is no 'magic' to it, 
except perhaps in the speed and ease with which 
sighted people have learned to make sense of it, 
even in visually cluttered scenes."

The system can have its drawbacks, however, as 
Fletcher found when she tried to listen to music 
on a portable CD player while doing her 
housework. "While standing still, it was no 
problem. But when I began to walk around, 
suddenly I was stumbling into walls and over 
tables. I couldn't believe how clumsy I was 
being. Then it hit me that the CD was not giving 
me the information I had grown accustomed to 
from the vOICe. I had to concentrate while 
wearing the portable CD headphones – it was 
like being blinded again."

As well as acting as a navigational aid, vOICe 
could also help visually impaired people to gain 
some kind of feel for visual items such as 
photographs, drawings, signs, graphs or 
pictograms, by providing information on 
perspective and colour.

Meijer describes another experiment in which 
development volunteer David Poehlman pointed 
his camera around and at his fingers, and across 
the Internet Meijer and Fletcher listened to the 
live soundscapes from his hand and heard his 
fingers moving in front of the camera, "in my 
case at a distance of thousands of miles across 
the Atlantic".

He says different blind people might stand to 
gain different things from vOICe. "For some it 
may be their first direct and interactive 
relationship with visual experience, possibly 
fulfilling a curiosity to learn about visual 
perspective, occlusion, parallax, shading and so 
on beyond the accounts that they got from 
sighted people. For those who lost eyesight later 
in life the reasons may again be very different. It 
can also be just a tool to gain access to graphs or 
to tell the colours of objects by means of the 
built-in colour identifier".

vOICe is available free for non-commercial 
purposes, although Meijer warns it is not an easy 
technology to use: "Vision is a complex mode of 
perception, involving a lot of learning and 
adaptation. Mastering the vOICe requires lots of 
effort and practice, perhaps comparable to 
learning a foreign language."

For more information visit:
http://www.seeingwithsound.com/winvoice.htm
Further testimonies are at:
http://www.softcon.com/ftp/magazines/aud21.txt
And to join an email list on vOICe send a blank 
email to:
seeingwithsound-subscribe@topica.com

[Section four ends]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail 
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in 
the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the 
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to 
sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' 
in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to 
Dan Jellinek at: dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. 
http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin may be 
reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of 
the report may be quoted as long as they are 
clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a 
free monthly email newsletter', and our web site 
address http://www.e-accessibility.com is also 
cited.

[Issue ends]
