E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts.]

ISSUE 19, JULY 2001.

IN THIS ISSUE:

Section One: News.

- Opportunity knocks for VisuGate: visual impairment portal 
receives 190,000 UK pounds from the National Lottery.
- Calling all language partners: Portuguese and Spanish 
organisations join E-Access Bulletin network.
- UK anti-discrimination law may extend to net.
-Margaret Bennett leaves National Library for the Blind: former 
chief executive takes up government post.
- Corporate giants fall down on web accessibility, survey finds.
- Magic 'remedy' to section 508: a satirical solution is found.
- News in brief: JustVanilla; Textphones, the last word; 
Techsharers wanted.

Section Two: Appeal response - sunlight sensitivity. Bulletin 
readers offer their advice to the father of a child seeking relief from 
the sun's glare.

Section Three: Reader response - co-operation is key. E-Access 
Bulletin reader Matt King rebuts Kevin Carey's contention that 
niche players in the access market are a recipe for failure.

Section Four: Profile - Charles Bennett: portrait of an online artist. 
Tamara Fletcher profiles the new 'virtual writer in residence' at the 
National Library for the Blind.

[Contents ends.] 


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

OPPORTUNITY KNOCKS FOR VISUGATE.

VisuGate (http://www.nlbuk.org/common/Visugate.html), a 
nascent visual impairment portal, has received 190,000 UK pounds 
from the National Lottery's New Opportunities Fund putting it on 
track to launch next summer.

The project is run by a 20-strong consortium, led by the National 
Library for the Blind and including the RNIB's Research Library; 
Action for Blind People; The British Journal of Visual Impairment; 
the International Centre for Eye Health; the Department of 
Education at University of Birmingham and BT Soundings.

According to project managers David Egan, recruitment was 
already underway and the active development phase will begin by 
the end of August this year. Testing is scheduled for next spring, 
leaving a few months to make final adjustments before its summer 
launch.


CALLING ALL LANGUAGE PARTNERS.

Following our appeal for translation partners, E-Access Bulletin 
has begun to collaborate with a network of blindness institutes and 
associations across Europe and the world to produce versions of 
the newsletter in different languages.

Our first language partner, as previously announced (see E-Access 
Bulletin, April 2001), is the Bologna-based Cavazza Institute. 
Information on our Italian version can be found at 
http://www.cavazza.it/eab and to subscribe to the Italian version 
email eab-it-subs@headstar.com

Subsequently we have been able to launch Portuguese and Spanish 
language versions. The Portuguese edition is being produced in 
association with GESTA (http://www.gesta.org), a sub-group of 
the Portuguese Association of Blind and Partially Sighted 
(ACAPO), with support from the Portuguese Guide Dogs 
Association. The project is led by Jorge Fernandes, special access 
adviser to the Portuguese government.

GESTA has members not only from Portugal but also from Brazil 
and the wider Portuguese-speaking world. The Portuguese 
language bulletin web site and archive can be found at:
http://www.gesta.org/eaccess/eaccess.htm and to subscribe to the 
Portuguese version email eab-pt-subs@headstar.com

Our Spanish version is produced by an Argentinian group 'Red de 
Integración Especial', with input from the Spanish national 
blindness institute ONCE (http://www.once.es). The project leader 
in Argentina is Graciela Caplan, professor of philosophy and 
literature and Buenos Aires University, and our advisor from 
ONCE is Pedro Zurita Fanjul, former Secretary General of the 
World Blind Union. An archive can be found at: 
http://www.redespecialweb.org/eaccess.htm and to subscribe to the 
Spanish version email eab-es-subs@headstar.com

We are extremely grateful to all our language partners, and are 
keen to hear of other potential collaborators who might be able to 
produce versions in other languages. Partners are required to 
translate or cover the costs of translation of the bulletin within 
about a week of its appearance each month, and to maintain a 
simple web page with details about that language version and a 
text archive. Anyone interested should contact the editor Dan 
Jellinek on dan@headstar.com


ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LAW MAY EXTEND TO NET.

UK legislation may help tackle discrimination against people with 
disabilities by wen site designers, according to a paper published 
this month in Warwick University Law School's Journal of 
Information, Law and Technology.

Author Martin Sloan argues that access guidelines set by the 
Disability Discrimination Act 1995 could be extended to services 
provided by the Internet. "It would otherwise seem anomalous to 
differentiate between a customer who visits a travel agent and 
another who wishes to use its online booking facility," Sloan says.

He backs up his case by referring to landmark legal battles in the 
US and Australia. 'Web accessibility and the DDA' can be found 
at:
http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/01-2/sloan.html


MARGARET BENNETT LEAVES NLB

Margaret Bennett has left her post as chief executive of the UK 
National Library for the Blind this month following her 
appointment as head of Lifelong Learning and Technologies 
Division at the Department for Education and Skills in Sheffield.

Bennett had held the top job at the NLB since 1996, where she has 
implemented a range of innovative projects designed to create a 
flexible library combining multiple formats including Braille, large 
print, digital texts and web services and focused on the needs of all 
kinds of visually impaired user. Before joining the charity she 
trained as an accountant and worked at West Midlands Arts, North 
West Arts and Nottingham Community Housing Association.

In her new post she will work on such initiatives as the University 
for Industry (http://www.ufiltd.co.uk), UK Online learning centres 
and projects relating to access to technology and online learning.

Erstwhile NLB deputy chief executive Helen Brazier is currently 
acting chief executive pending the recruitment of a permanent 
replacement by the organisation's trustees.


CORPORATE GIANTS FALL DOWN ON ACCESSIBILITY.

All but six of the UK's 100 largest listed companies have failed to 
make adequate provision for accessible web design, according to 
research by Internet developer Aspect Internet.

Aspect spokesperson Sarah Gooding would not reveal the full list 
of results, saying: "We don't want to do a naming and shaming 
exercise." But Gooding said firms covered in the survey would be 
told their score if they contact Aspect 
(http://www.aspectgroup.co.uk).

The company did, however, name the six companies which 
managed to achieve the 85% pass mark: Tesco, Alliance & 
Leicester, Lloyds TSB, Amvescap, Royal Bank of Scotland and 
Vodafone.


MAGIC 'REMEDY' TO SECTION 508.

An imaginative solution has been found to the chaos caused by the 
'Section 508' US government technology procurement regulations 
imposed on 21 June to enforce web accessibility standards: the 
'Magic 508 ball'.

The 12-sided cardboard figure was the brainchild of Jim Tobias, 
president of accessibility company Inclusive Technologies. Its 
sides carry all the 508 regulations, "from 1194.21 in SubPart B to 
1194.41 in SubPart D".

Though "pretty free of features", Tobias says it provides a physical 
outlet for those forced to wrestle with the complexities of the 
regulations. So far 180 people have been driven to order the 
flimsy, flammable dodecahedron, although no accessible Braille 
version has yet been produced.

For more on the confusion surrounding Section 508 see the 
January and June issues of E-Access Bulletin. And for more about 
the Magic 508 Ball visit:
http://www.inclusive.com/info_tech/magic_508_ball.htm


News In Brief:

ACCESS ALL AREAS: Last month saw the launch of JustVanilla, 
a web site through which users can browse the Internet using their 
own viewing settings. By browsing indirectly through the site 
visually impaired users need no longer be tied to using a particular 
customised machine. See: http://www.justvanilla.com

TEXTPHONES, THE LAST WORD: A guide to buying a 
textphone has been made available on the Internet by Ricability, 
the research organisation for consumers with disabilities. See 
under 'Communication' at http://www.ricability.org.uk/reports.asp

TECHSHARERS WANTED: Techshare 2001, an RNIB sponsored 
conference on learning, work, digital society and technology on 27 
and 28 November in Birmingham, is open to submissions for 45-
minute presentations. Email techshare@rnib.org.uk or paste them 
into the form at http://www.techshare.org.uk

SAO PAOLO SEMINAR: A Portuguese language seminar called 
'Acessibilidade, Tecnologia da Informação e Inclusão Digital' – 
'Accessibility, IT and digital inclusion' - is taking place on 28-29 
August in Sao Paolo Brazil: http://www.fsp.usp.br/acessibilidade

[Section One ends.]


SECTION TWO: APPEAL RESPONSE
- SUNLIGHT SENSITIVITY.

TACKLING GLARE: A SERIOUS NUISANCE

Following last month's appeal from an E-Access Bulletin reader 
for information about devices to help his young daughter who 
suffers from poor vision and sunlight sensitivity, we received a 
large number of extremely helpful reader responses, including 
links to a number of useful web resources – thanks very much to 
you all.

Chris McMillan, a member of the American Nystagmus mailing 
list, writes in to say: "If the child has achromatopsia (total colour 
blindness) then there is a self-help group right on their doorstep in 
California. Frances Futterman is the lady who set it up, and one of 
the things she has done is track down a complete list of types of 
'wrap round' sun specs. The Achromatopsia Network web site is at:
http://www.achromat.org/

He also suggests Eschenbach Sunglasses which use Corning glare 
control lenses (details from http://www.eschenbach.com/ - but see 
also Jen Hensil's comments below), and he says shops such as 
Toys"R"us and Walmart also sell suitable sunglasses for VI 
children.

However, Jen Hensil adds: "I would not recommend the Corning 
lenses on children. Corning lenses are glass, and therefore have a 
propensity to shatter. A far better option for children with light 
sensitivity are NoIR sunshields from NoIR Medical Technologies. 
They come in a wider variety of shades and darknesses than 
Corning, are far less expensive, and safer since they are plastic.

"I also recommend seeing a low vision doctor for glare 
evaluations."

Another American Nystagmus list member agrees: "NoIR 
sunshields are safe and fairly sturdy and are available in a range of 
'shades' so you can get the kind that works best for your child. 
They are more likely to wear them if they are comfortable with the 
colour and shape of the ones they get. [My child's] are large with 
wrap-around shades, meaning the shade continues onto both sides 
and there is no frame outline to distract his side vision."

Bulletin reader Jane Fleming says: "I have cone dysplexsia, and 
part of the condition means I squint in bright sunlight. Of the 
prescribed sunglasses the all-round kind are the best. In the event I 
purchased a pair of skiing glasses - the ones used to counteract 
snow-blindness. They are simple, inexpensive and widely 
available.

"I have also changed the background page colour of Word 
documents on my computer to an off-white and I browse the 
Internet with a grey background screen with light graphic. I wear 
sunglasses to use the Internet and I have an anti-glare screen 
device."

David Porter writes in with a refreshingly non-technical 
suggestion. "They've probably tried it, but just in case, I wonder if 
a broad brimmed hat might help. I see better in bright sunlight 
when I have some shade - not necessarily sunglasses."

John Sanders, vice president of the UK Nystagmus Network, says 
our reader's daughter may have nystagmus. "There is no cure for 
nystagmus, but there are a number of things which may help. For 
example, his daughter would probably benefit from wrap-around 
sun-glasses and a baseball cap. She may also need prescription 
glasses to correct myopia which she may have as well - ideally, she 
will already have prescription glasses if she needs them, but sadly 
we find that isn't always the case or that the prescription is wrong."

The Nystagmus Network has a web site at:
http://www.btinternet.com/~lynest/nystag01.htm

Sue Allard writes in to say she has Retinitis Pigmentosa and 
suffers badly with glare problems. "All sunglasses - whatever 
colour - block too much light and so my vision is depleted even 
more. I'm not sure which is worse, the glare or the 'cure'!

"However, I have finally found some lenses that really do help. 
They have been tested out and are recommended by the British 
Retinitis Pigmentosa Society (http://www.brps.demon.co.uk). They 
are 'Blue-Bloc' lenses, which, as the name suggests, block out 
only the blue, problem-causing wavelengths.
For more information email Ian Pyzer at Medi-View on 
eyepyzer@aol.com

"Glare does seem to be a major problem in most eye conditions. It 
seems, from my experience with Gloucestershire County 
Association for the Blind that many sighted people do not realise 
or understand what a difference can be made for someone with 
even very little sight, if glare can be managed.

"I have had some dealings with people producing signs and it has 
been extremely difficult to persuade them that white shiny surfaces 
with black writing is not the way to go! I would be very interested 
to hear from others with glare problems to hear how it affects them 
and how they deal with it." Responses to this new appeal are 
welcomed via the editor of E-Access Bulletin Dan Jellinek on 
dan@headstar.com

 [Section two ends.]


SECTION THREE: READER RESPONSE.
- UNIVERSAL ACCESS.

* In an article in last month's bulletin, 'Commercial sector must be 
driven to build in accessibility', Kevin Carey argued it would be 
preferable for major software developers to build accessibility 
features into their products rather than people having to rely on 
niche-market accessibility suppliers.

For all its strengths, Carey said, the specialist accessibility 
marketplace is fragile and ramshackle and ultimately investment 
and reliability are more important than improvisation and 
enthusiasm. He concluded that if current disability law was 
inadequate to force suppliers to make their products accessible 
then the law must be beefed up.

One reader at least, Matt King, begged to differ: below, we publish 
his response. If anyone would like to continue the debate please 
email the editor Dan Jellinek on dan@headstar.com


CO-OPERATION IS KEY
By Matt King  mattking@us.ibm.com

In the first place, I can't imagine that either of the two practical 
examples in Kevin Carey's article - failure to add a Braille display 
to an access package producing speech and failure to make a new 
laptop accessible as it ran a new operating system incompatible 
with earlier access software - would be any better served in the 
future he suggests.

Does he know how companies the size of Microsoft work? When 
was the last time you were able to get an issue with a 'niche' 
feature of an MS product (or the product of any other major 
computer sofware developer) resolved any faster or cheaper than 
you could with GW Micro or Freedom Scientific?

Second, does he realise how large companies respond to legislated 
solutions? Remember that in the environment he is suggesting that 
the large software developers will not have any revenue streams 
that are dependent on the quality of the access solution built-in to 
their products.

With excruciating difficulty, someone may be able to develop 
some local legislation in the UK or somewhere else to legislate for 
some minimal level of quality. Besides being expensive to enforce, 
keeping the legislation current would be nearly impossible. That 
would surely slow down progress toward more advanced and truly 
universal design.

Third, do sighted users have a different way to read a line, word, or 
character in every software package? Imagine having to learn how 
to do these things with each different commercial vendors' 
products. And don't think you would even have consistency among 
products offered by the same company. Or is he suggesting a 
100,000-page piece of legislation that would become obsolete 
every few years as it intimately details how every access operation 
should be implemented?

Finally, if we are making this request for one disability, shouldn't 
we make it for all? And, what is the definition of all? Where do 
you stop? How small of a niche do we force companies to serve? 
Do we stop at disabling conditions experienced by x% of the 
population or less? What would 'x' be?

I would encourage everyone to think in terms of how we can 
leverage the marketplace and technology to work in our favour. 
For instance, there is a huge lack of standards in the accessibility 
industry. Instead of working with disconnected and relatively 
ineffective legislative bodies around the world, what about putting 
the same amount of energy toward developing standards for 
compatibility and communications between assistive technologies 
and general purpose software?

There are excellent forums for doing this in the various IT and 
electronics industry standards bodies. I think the IT industry is 
ready and willing to co-operate.

* This reader response is by Matt King, Accessibility End User 
Advocate, IBM Business Transformation. Views expressed are his 
own and not necessarily those of IBM.

[Section three ends.]


SECTION FOUR: PROFILE.
-VIRTUAL VERSE.

CHARLES BENNETT: PORTRAIT OF AN ONLINE ARTIST.
By Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

"Messages travelling on bursts of electricity – like thought. Each 
of us thinking and all the wires lit up with our words. I'm 47 and 
married and didn't want to tell my story the usual way. I was 
born".

Thus writes Charles Bennett in a poetic biography written for the 
National Library for the Blind on his appointment this month as 
the organisation's fifth 'virtual writer in residence'.

Following Matthew Sweeney, Susan Everett, Jean Sprackland and 
Syed Manzurul Islam into this position, he will take up 'residence' 
on the library's web site (http://www.nlbuk.org) as part of its 
interactive 'Read On' programme for blind book-lovers. The 
scheme has funding from the National Lottery.

Bennett has a love of all things creative, especially poetry, for 
which he credits his English teacher. School was not an otherwise 
pleasant experience for him as he endured bullying. "It was a 
glimmer of light in a dark forest – I guess I must have been about 
14 but I think you continue to discover poetry throughout your 
whole life," he says.

Leaving school at the age of 16, he worked in industry for 14 years 
before enrolling at University to study drama and theatre studies at 
the age of 30, where he graduated and went on to teach English. 

He gave up his teaching career as he wanted to concentrate on 
poetry and became 'Reader in Residence' in Blackpool, with a 
remit to foster an interest in reading in the area. He developed a 
number of projects including the Blackpool Beach Library.

"I ran the smallest mobile library in the world – I ran books in a 
wheelbarrow up and down Blackpool Prom and delivered books to 
your deckchair," says Bennett.

In January 2000 he was appointed as Literature Development 
Facilitator at Staffordshire County Council where he worked with 
librarians and the public to promote literature. One of the schemes 
he was involved in there centred around live poetry readings in 
estate agents and the estate agents themselves would write their 
own poetry as part of the 'Poetry Places' scheme funded by the 
Poetry Society.

Bennett became interested in the possibility of using computers for 
his work when he visited Smith College in the US back in autumn 
1986. He found what he describes as an "electronic treasure trove" 
where the students taught him to translate his work from paper to 
screen.

"One of the benefits of using a computer for a poet is that you can 
manipulate type written text more easily. It benefits the visually 
impaired or blind as they can access a great deal of information 
without having to leave home."

As Virtual Poet in Residence at the NLB his role will be "to 
stimulate an interest in poetry, literature and life," and to stimulate 
an interest in individual creativity and contemporary poetry.

The full requirements of his role are still being firmed up but it is 
likely that he will be responsible for choosing a book each month 
and entering into dialogue with readers via the web as well as 
having audio files of his readings to download from the site. He 
will also encourage the writing of poetry by visitors.

"I am happy to talk about bananas and chickpeas, cricket or poetry; 
to engage in debate; or to provide an insight into the world and 
extrasensory ability. The visually impaired and blind have a special 
way of interacting, almost extrasensory. I think disability is the 
wrong word as it's like an extra ability," he says.

One of the major disadvantages to blind people he cites as "not 
being able to access contemporary texts so it's more difficult to be 
as widely read. My guess is that there are advantages as those with 
visual impairment tend to be more responsive to cadence and 
nuance.  Seeing can be a visual noise which stops you 
concentrating."

As manager of the Ledbury Poetry Festival (http://www.poetry-
festival.com) he says he would also like to think about developing 
some projects aimed at accessible poetry for the blind for next 
year's event.

This year's festival has just taken place, and Bennett is currently 
recovering from something of a "poetry hangover". So the virtual 
residency will be the hair of the dog – and E-Access Bulletin 
readers are urged to visit his web page at 
http://www.nlbuk.org/readon/wir/current.html and help him 
recover.

[Section four ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail eab-
subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can 
list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please 
encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin 
may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as long as they 
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is 
also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 


[Issue ends.]
