E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the 
Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts.]

ISSUE 18, JUNE 2001.

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News.
-'Chaos' as us government scrambles for 
accessibility: Tardy compliance leads to 
confusion.
-UK government Gateway may overstep the law: 
Microsoft-designed web may breach the law.
-Ballot box access improves: "marked 
improvement" recognised in access to voting
-Techshare 2001 opens its doors to all: RNIB 
opens conference to wider audience.
-Sunlight sensitivity: an appeal for assistance
-Access tip – the mouse that magnifies.
News in brief: Meet your doom; Sky audio 
descriptions; Testing time.

Section Two: Special feature
-Time to stop the cycle of spiralling costs.

Section Three: Opinion
-Commercial sector must be driven to build in 
accessibility.

Section Four: Special feature
-The web is about communication, not 
technology.

[Contents ends.] 


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

'CHAOS' AS US GOVERNMENT 
SCRAMBLES FOR ACCESSIBILITY.

Late action and a lack of awareness of technology 
access issues across many US government 
agencies is resulting in "chaos" as they scramble 
to hit Monday's deadline for tighter federal 
software and hardware standards, according to 
one leading US expert.

New 'Federal Acquisition Regulations' made 
under Section 508 of the US Rehabilitation Act 
1973 stipulate that all development, procurement, 
maintenance and general use of electronic and 
information technology has to be accessible to 
those with disabilities (see E-Access Bulletin, 
January issue 2001).

The new law applies to all new IT systems 
purchased by the US government from desktop 
computers and software to office equipment. 
Companies that fail to meet accessibility 
standards may no longer be allowed to sell to 
federal agencies.

Implementation of the law has been shrouded in 
confusion, as public bodies are unsure of how the 
rules will apply to existing web sites and services. 
On the face of it, the law will not be retrospective, 
but under conditions applying to 'indefinite 
quantity contracts' new work on existing projects 
could be vulnerable to legal action. Accordingly, 
some bodies are preparing to shut down existing 
sites as they seek clarification.

Mike Paciello, founder of the technology 
accessibility group WebABLE 
(http://www.webable.com) says one of the key 
problems for US government agencies  is a lack 
of expertise. "There are not enough experts 
available to help federal agencies achieve the 
accessibility goals. Several agencies just did not 
prepare well for this mandate. As a result, many 
are scrambling and panicking. That causes chaos, 
stress, and usually results in poor quality product 
development."

Companies are being forced to take the issue of 
accessibility seriously as they fear losing federal 
contracts. It's not just about the web, it's 
everything - hardware, software, networks, 
documentation, and help systems.

The picture is not all bleak, however: "Section 
508 is building awareness of accessibility issues 
for the blind at unprecedented levels.  I believe it 
will encourage greater collaboration between the 
blind, government agencies, and industry to 
achieve optimal accessibility performance and 
productivity. Web designers are beginning to 
realize that the more they test their sites with 
blind co-workers and clients, they can develop 
truly accessible web interfaces".

The regulations allow individuals with disabilities 
to file a complaint against any federal agency that 
has not complied with the standards. For more 
information see:
http://www.section508.gov/


UK GOVERNMENT GATEWAY MAY 
OVERSTEP THE LAW.

The UK government Gateway, a Microsoft-
designed web site where people can sign up for e-
government services, may be in breach of law 
protecting disabled people from discrimination.

According to Australian access consultant Tom 
Worthington design faults in the Gateway 
(http://www.gateway.gov.uk) may mean it 
contravenes a law that requires government 
bodies to provide the same standard of service to 
all.

Worthington was speaking at a seminar in 
London last week organised by the RNIB. Last 
year he contributed to a court case that found that 
the Sydney Organising Committee for the 
Olympic Games breached Australian law by 
providing a web site largely inaccessible to the 
blind (see E-Access Bulletin, May 2001).

This week another leading accessibility 
commentator, Kevin Carey of HumanITy, urged 
all major software suppliers including Microsoft 
to build accessibility into all their products from 
the outset, since the fragmented specialist access 
software marketplace was not a proper solution 
for most people's needs.

Writing in this month's E-Access Bulletin Carey 
said if the current Disability Discrimination Act 
was not strong enough to force the software and 
hardware giants to comply, the law should be 
tightened up further (see section three, this issue).


BALLOT BOX ACCESS IMPROVES.

Scope, a disability charity focusing on cerebral 
palsy, has recognised a "marked improvement" in 
access to voting for blind and visually impaired 
people following a survey of disabled people's 
experiences in the recent UK general election.

The election was the first since the Representation 
of the People Act made new tactile voting devices 
mandatory. "The overall picture was somewhat 
different from what we had expected", a 
spokesperson for the charity said. "Cases of bad 
access were more isolated."

The conclusion was based on a preliminary 
review of responses to Polls Apart 3 
(http://www.pa3.org.uk), a survey of access 
problems at polling stations led by Scope.  So far 
volunteers have sent in around 1,000 responses 
from over 400 constituencies, or 61% of the total.


TECHSHARE 2001 OPENS ITS DOORS TO 
ALL.

The RNIB is opening up its regular internal 
'Techshare' conference on access to technology 
by blind and visually impaired people to a wider 
audience.

For the first time, Techshare 2001 will be open 
for all to attend, including all professionals who 
work in the field of visual impairment, or have an 
active interest in technology and how it facilitates 
independent access to education, employment, 
lifelong learning and society for visually impaired 
people.

Delegates are also expected from government, 
statutory bodies, the ICT marketplace and the 
voluntary sector, creating what should be the 
most influential UK forum to debate technology 
access issues.

The conference is to be held on 27-28 November 
2001 at Jury's Inn, Birmingham. Cost is 90 UK 
pounds for one day or 150 pounds for two days. 
For more details or to apply telephone 024-7636 
9548 or email: Techshare@RNIB.org.uk


SUNLIGHT SENSITIVITY – APPEAL FOR 
ASSISTANCE.

An E-Access Bulletin reader in California, R De 
La Vega, writes to appeal for information about 
any devices people are aware of to help his young 
daughter who suffers from poor vision and 
sunlight sensitivity.

"I can't find anything to help her to see better. 
Everywhere I go they never have anything that 
will help her to see better in the sun", he says. If 
readers have any advice, with web links if 
possible to any recommended products, please 
email Dan Jellinek on dan@headstar.com


ACCESS TIP – THE MOUSE THAT 
MAGNIFIES.

If you are looking to renew your computer mouse, 
E-Access Bulletin reader writes in with a tip: 
there is one model with a handy accessibility aid 
that is actually among the cheapest on the market.

The Classic Mouse Standard from Dexin 
(http://www.dexin.com.tw/classic-big.htm) has a 
third, central, button, which operates a magnifier. 
The level of magnification can be set to suit the 
user and it is useful for reading e-mail addresses.

Placing the cursor at the beginning of text and 
pressing the centre button creates a small, 
rectangular window, showing enlarged text a few 
letters at a time. Holding down the button and 
scrolling horizontally, or vertically, moves the 
magnifier across the text and enables the user to 
read even the dots in email addresses. The mouse 
is available from many retailers for around 10 UK 
pounds or less.

Do you have a handy access tip? If so, please 
send it in to Phil Cain on phil@headstar.com


NEWS IN BRIEF:

MEET YOUR DOOM: Shades of Doom, a 
version of the hit 'shoot-em-up' computer game 
Doom designed for the blind and visually 
impaired, has launched. For details see:
http://www.gmagames.com

SKY AUDIO DESCRIPTIONS: BSkyB, the 
multichannel television company, has launched a 
channel providing audio descriptions of its 
programming. For more information call the 
special needs helpline on 08705 66 33 33 if you 
are in the UK or 1 800 509085 for customers in 
Ireland.

TESTING TIME: Ricability 
(http://www.ricability.org.uk), a product testing 
organisation, are asking parents of children under 
the age of two to help them research ease of use 
of baby slings and carriers. If you are interested, 
contact Dylan Simanowitz at 
dylansimanowitz@ricability.org.uk


[Section One ends.]

SECTION TWO: SPECIAL FEATURE.
- ACCESS COSTS.

TIME TO STOP THE CYCLE OF SPIRALLING 
COSTS.
By Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

The plummeting cost of computer technology 
means the cost of getting reliable access to the 
Internet at home has fallen dramatically for most. 
Not so for the blind, a group who have more to 
gain than most from the net's liberating potential.

Sighted people pay an initial cost of little more 
than 300 UK pounds for a minimum specification 
computer to get hooked up to the Internet at 
home, and can then expect to spend around 200 
pounds a year for their connection. But the blind, 
and those who support them, have to find nearly 
2,500 pounds a person, followed by as much as 
800 pounds a year to maintain their connection 
and keep their computer skills up to date.

Top quality screen reading software and a 
computer powerful enough to run it costs around 
900 pounds. A machine with a 133 MHz 
processor, 20 megabytes of memory and 30 
megabytes of hard disc space is needed to run this 
software, costing around 300 pounds – so far, not 
bad. But ironically, the easiest and most flexible 
screen reading packages to use are also the most 
expensive. Top of the range solutions include 
'JAWS' - Job Access With Speech 
(http://www.hj.com/JAWS/JAWS.html) and 
Window-eyes 
(http://www.gwmicro.com/windoweyes/windowe
yes.htm), which cost 585 pounds and 400 pounds 
respectively.

On top of these initial costs, blind users also need 
to finance essential ongoing software costs 
sighted people do not incur: yearly updates to 
screen-reading software often cost around 100 
pounds each.

There are a number of organisations providing 
grants to help blind people in the UK to purchase 
computer hardware for home use. Among them 
are Leonard Cheshire (http://www.leonard-
cheshire.org), which helps disabled find work; 
Electronic Aid for Blind People 
(http://www.eabnet.org.uk), subject to a rigorous 
selection procedure; and Action for Blind People 
(http://www.afbp.org/homepage.htm) which 
provides 400 top-up grants of up to 300 pounds to 
people who have found funding elsewhere.

For the visually impaired, the bulk of the expense 
of getting online is not the technology but the 
specialist training and technical support needed to 
operate it. Like any specialist training, it does not 
come cheap.

A skills shortage, particularly acute in the area of 
access technology, combined with a backlog of 
people wanting training, mean this already 
expensive services are only likely to get more so. 
Access training is particularly expensive because 
it has to be one-to-one, usually with a trainer who 
is blind themselves.

According to Mark Prouse, technology advisor at 
the RNIB, most new users need five days of one-
to-one training before they can go it alone. At 300 
pounds a day, the sum charged by the RNIB, this 
brings the total initial training cost to 1,500 
pounds. For those wanting to top up their 
computing knowledge so they can tackle ongoing 
problems, another two days a year may be 
needed, costing 600 pounds.

Government help in gaining access training for 
blind people is provided on the condition that it is 
needed to get a job. Maria Lennox, a Jobcentre 
disabled employment advisor, said those hoping 
to take advantage of vocational training must go 
through an "in-depth assessment", before being 
offered residential training at an RNIB centre in 
Redhill. "I haven't sent anybody in the last six 
months," Lennox said.

As in the UK, people in the US need to prove that 
Internet access is needed in the workplace before 
the state will pay for training. Psychologist Nancy 
Badger, an E-Access Bulletin reader based in the 
US, said she received a week's free vocational 
JAWS training through the Services for the Blind 
section of the US Vocational Rehabilitation 
Government Agency.

While the RNIB does not subsidise its training 
programmes, regional charities do offer cut price 
training IT training. One such organisation is the 
Brighton Society for the Blind 
(http://www.bsblind.co.uk) which provides 
vocational computer training for registered blind 
people at a price to the client of just over 20 
pounds a day.

According to director Gloria Wright funding the 
training service costs the charity 20,000 pounds a 
year despite a subsidy from the government's 
Employment Service, which until recently sent 
local people to the centre rather than to the RNIB 
at Redhill. Though no longer contracted to the 
Employment Service, Wright said the society is 
considering alternative ways of contributing to 
the the training.

In general, the stringent conditions attached to 
government help for blind people to have ready 
access to technology risks creating a situation 
whereby blind people can't receive assistance 
unless they prove they are actively seeking work, 
but they can't seek work without the technology 
skills. With 71% of blind people of working age 
not in employment, it is in everyone's interest, not 
least the taxpayer's, to ensure this cycle is broken.

*This article is the first in an occasional series 
dealing with the practical side of how blind and 
visually impaired people gain and maintain access 
to the Internet. We are keen to feature the 
experiences of our readers, including those 
outside the UK - please email Phil Cain on 
phil@headstar.com with your personal stories.

[Section two ends.]


SECTION THREE: OPINION.
- UNIVERSAL ACCESS.

COMMERCIAL SECTOR MUST BE DRIVEN 
TO BUILD IN ACCESSIBILITY.
By Kevin Carey, Director, HumanITy  
humanity@atlas.co.uk

A few years ago I caused something of a stir at 
the 'Sight Village' visual impairment conference 
by asking some representatives of Microsoft why 
the company was bothering to go through the 
tedious and somewhat chancey process of 
handing over its software code to accessibility 
developers, in order to make its products 
accessible. Why, I asked, didn't it just build in 
accessibility features in its own products from the 
outset?

The disingenuous answer I received was that 
Microsoft didn't want to put small developers out 
of business, a rather odd statement given the 
firm's appetite for putting its rivals out of 
business.

Leaving aside, for a moment, the question of 
Braille, there really is no reason why major 
software developers can't provide such good 
synthetic speech, screen magnification and screen 
reading features built into their products that we 
don't need to bother with the niche market access 
suppliers. For all its faults - and they are well 
enough known - you would bet on Microsoft 
producing the goods and surviving over any 
access supplier, even the mighty Freedom 
Scientific (http://www.freedomscientific.com).

This is not to say that the accessibility sector is 
not committed, even heroic. Some of its 
enthusiasts are almost missionary in their zeal, 
but the marketplace as a whole is fragile and 
ramshackle and ultimately investment and 
reliability are more important than improvisation 
and enthusiasm.

That, at any rate, has long been my theoretical 
framework but it was given a huge practical boost 
by two recent events, both involving the products 
of a major access software developer.

In the first, one of the world's leading access 
technology academics and I wasted hours failing 
to add a Braille display to an access package 
producing speech. A third of the way round the 
world from the product's manufacturer, with a 
proportionate eight hour time difference, we 
would not have been able to access telephone 
support even if we could have afforded it.

The second event was the arrival of my wonderful 
new Sony Vaio laptop computer, a present from 
Sony for some work I had done for the company. 
My local fixer soon ascertained that my access 
package would need a major and expensive 
upgrade because the machine came with 
Windows 2000. I asked him to put in Windows 
'98 and install my old access package but the 
Vaio's drivers weren't having any of that. Result - 
lovely new laptop in a box.

It is to be hoped that legislation on both sides of 
the Atlantic will put a stop to the mainstream 
fiddling with access and the niche market 
struggling. If we could overcome the irrational 
prejudice of the elite in favour of an over-
complex, contracted Grade II Braille diktat, the 
simpler alphabetic Grade I Braille could be 
simply dropped into a style sheet. After all, if you 
can convert the standard computer character 
system ASCII 256 into a huge combination of 
pixels, you ought to be able to convert a quarter 
of that number of characters into six pixels, which 
is essentially what Braille is.

The visual impairment sector cannot go on like 
this. Major agencies like the RNIB are plagued by 
niche developers who are at once wheedling and 
defensive, wanting grants but resenting 
competition. We need to find out if the UK's 
Disability Discrimination Act is strong enough to 
force the commercial sector and the government 
to make its information accessible which will, in 
turn, force them to put pressure on their software 
suppliers. And if the law is not up to it, then it 
needs to be changed.

[Section three ends.]

SECTION FOUR: SPECIAL FEATURE.
- DESIGN BASICS.

THE WEB IS ABOUT COMMUNICATION, 
NOT TECHNOLOGY.

Clarity of style and design in a web site are 
important for all audiences, not just for visually 
impaired web users. The golden rule of clear web 
site design is to decide what you want your site to 
do, and then use technology to achieve this goal.

Too many designers find out what technology can 
do first and then try think of something to do with 
it. But a web site is a means of communication, 
not a way of showing off your technical 
knowledge.

There are several basic ground rules for good site 
navigation. When a visitor comes to your site, it 
should be clear straight away to whom the site 
belongs; what purpose the site serves; and how to 
contact the people behind the site. If you are 
tempted to only put an email address and no 
phone number or postal address, remember that 
you may be asked for these details regularly 
through emails, so you will waste your time 
replying; and having a phone number and 'real-
life' address will reassure visitors that you are a 
genuine organisation.

However you organise your site, try to make sure 
that the structure is as logical as possible; and that 
there is a back-up (such as a guide to the site, or a 
'site map') for visitors who can't find what they 
are looking for.

Remember that visitors may not always enter 
your site at the home page. For example, they 
may be following a link to one of the other pages 
on your site, or they may have found another page 
through a search engine.

This means it is a good idea if every page on your 
site has clear links to basic information about 
your organisation or subject; a guide to pages on 
the site (often called a 'site map'); and contact 
information for you or your organisation. Try also 
to make it easy for visitors to find which parts of 
your site you have changed recently.

A good guideline that many web designers use is 
that you should be able to get from any page on 
your site to any other page with just three clicks 
of a mouse.

When you use pieces of text as a link, try to avoid 
just using the words 'click here'. This is because 
visually impaired people using a screen reader, 
which converts the text on a website to speech, 
will only hear the words used for the link. Just 
hearing 'click here' will not give any idea what the 
link is for.

When using pictures and images, try to use 
'thumbnails'. These are small copies of a picture 
that the visitor can click on to then see a full-sized 
copy. This saves them having to wait for 
unwanted images to download to full size.

Always remember to include an 'Alt description 
tag' with the picture. This is a piece of text that 
appears in place of the picture if the visitor has 
their computer set to not show pictures. It also 
allows people with visual problems who are using 
screen-readers to know what the picture shows.

If your design package allows it, make sure to set 
the height and width of the image. This means 
that when the page loads, the visitor's computer 
will leave a space for the image and load the text 
first. The visitor can then start reading the page 
without having to wait for the image to load.

Many sites feature a 'splash' page. This is a page 
that appears when somebody first visits your site 
which displays a large image or animation and 
then takes you to the home page. This is useful if 
you want to create a particular first impression, 
but is a bad idea if the page takes a long time to 
load.

Remember that most web designers have better 
computers and faster connections to the Internet 
than most ordinary visitors to your site. What 
takes a couple of seconds to load on a fast 
computer can cause a frustrating wait for others. 
If you do use an animated 'splash page', always 
give people the opportunity to skip past the 
animation and go straight to the rest of your site.

Finally, if you do hire outside help for your site, 
remember one golden rule. The designer is there 
to produce what you have asked for, not to use 
your site to show off what they can do!

* This article is based on the Plain English 
Campaign's free guide to clear web design. For 
more information see 
http://www.plainenglish.co.uk/ or telephone: 
01663 744409

[Section four ends.]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail 
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in 
the subject header. You can list other email 
addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. 
Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' 
in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to 
Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. 
http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin may be 
reproduced in full as long as all parts including 
this copyright notice are included. Sections of the 
report may be quoted as long as they are clearly 
sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free 
monthly email newsletter', and our web site 
address http://www.e-accessibility.com is also 
cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  
tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  
humanity@atlas.co.uk 


[Issue ends.]
