E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for 
the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts.]

ISSUE 15, MARCH 2001.

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News
- Still time for education bill; Telecoms report 
lays down the law; New Acrobat limbers up; 
Researchers look into tongue vision; Guide 
dogs win technology award; Gloves for 
signing – part two; Browser launches through 
portal.

News in brief: Refreshable braille, Sky 
programme guide, Events.

Section Two: Analysis.
- Copyright.

Section Three: Adventure.
- Polar exploration.

Section Four: Media regulation.
- Convergence.


[Contents ends.]


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

STILL TIME FOR EDUCATION BILL.

New government legislation to improve 
access to education is set to scrape though 
before parliament is dissolved for a General 
Election.

The Special Educational Needs and Disability 
Bill had its second reading in the House of 
Commons on Tuesday 20 March. It has now 
proceeded to committee stage, where final 
amendments can be made.

According to Olga Miller, head of the 
children's policy unit at RNIB, the committee 
is likely to push the legislation through as 
quickly as possible. Throughout its passage 
compromises have been made on both sides 
to speed its progress, according to Miller.

The bill is widely criticised by representatives 
of the disabled for not requiring schools to 
buy equipment and not containing any 
reference to accessible information. However, 
RNIB parliamentary officer Caroline Ellis 
says it establishes guidelines for schools to 
follow to provide disabled students "access to 
the curriculum", which may in some cases 
mean access to technology.

Such requirements do have "real teeth", Ellis 
says. Different modes of redress are open to 
students or parents who feel adequate access 
has not been provided, though its form 
depends on the age of the student. A new 
local-authority run tribunal process is planned 
for students under sixteen.

Litigation will be another means of seeking 
redress, but it will remain an expensive 
process. But, according to Ellis, the Disability 
Rights Commission would have the power to 
support some cases. Ellis said that 
compensation awards made under the new 
legislation are likely to be practical rather 
than financial.

As the Bill reached committee this week, the 
government announced a separate package of 
10 million UK Pounds in new funding for 
communication aids for children with special 
educational needs, including voice 
recognition systems and hand-held spell-
checkers.

For Department for Education and 
Employment consultation on the subject of 
access see: 
http://www.dfee.gov.uk/consultations/


TELECOMS REPORT LAYS DOWN THE 
LAW.

A report explaining the new rights disabled 
people have when they deal with telephone 
companies has been released by Ricability, an 
organisation specialising in providing 
research for disabled people.

The new rights will apply from October 2001, 
having been put forward in the 
Telecommunications (Services for Disabled 
Persons) Regulations late last year.

New telecoms access rights include free 
priority repair services; the option to 
nominate someone that can deal with phone 
bills for them; and customer information in a 
form that can be read by the visually 
impaired. The report also touches on issues 
surrounding access to digital telecoms 
devices.

Bob Twitchin, recently appointed chairman 
of the Telecommunications for Disabled and 
Elderly People (DIEL), a committee set up by 
parliament to advise the telecoms regulator 
Oftel, said: "DIEL commends Ricability for 
it's work along with the network operators 
that helped fund the project with DIEL and 
Oftel." For more information about on DIEL 
see: http://www.acts.org.uk/diel

The government is currently considering the 
nature of a single regulator for telecoms and 
media services called Ofcom into which Oftel 
will be merged. The RNIB recently made a 
response to these proposals: see section three 
of this issue of E-Access Bulletin.


NEW ACROBAT LIMBERS UP.

A new version of Acrobat is due for release in 
April, with much being made of its enhanced 
access capabilities. 

The most significant addition is the addition 
of an automated function that can assess the 
accessibility of pages it produces. Other new 
functions include keyboard shortcuts, high 
contrast viewing, zoom capabilities and the 
generation of a summary of a document's 
structure when imported from Microsoft 
Office.

Of course, the decision to produce an 
accessible document will continue to rest 
entirely with the authors of PDF files. 
Authors are under no legal obligation to 
provide accessible versions of their file (see 
section two, this issue).

For more information on the accessibility of 
Adobe Acrobat 5.0, which is due for release 
in April, see: http://access.adobe.com


RESEARCHERS LOOK INTO TONGUE 
VISION.

Scientists at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison in the US are working on a device to 
allow a person to 'see' using their tongue.

The device works by sending electrical 
signals from a video camera to a matrix of 
minute electrode 'stimulators' lying on the 
surface of the tongue. The concept was 
devised by Professor Paul Bach-y-Rita who 
discovered people could feel shapes with 
their tongue with a similar resolution as they 
can with their fingers.

To learn more about the tongue display 
device see the home page of on of the tactile 
tongue device's developers Kurt Kaczmarek:
http://kaz2.med.wisc.edu/Publicity/FAQ.html


GUIDE DOGS WIN TECHNOLOGY 
AWARD.

The Guide Dogs for the Blind Association's 
website at http://www.guidedogs.org.uk (see 
also e-access bulletin October 2000) has won 
the 'Charity Website of the Year' award or 
organised by publishing companies Popular 
Communication and Charity Times. Among 
the seven nominees for the award were non-
profit organisations including Action for 
Blind People.

Katy Roberts of Guide Dogs for the Blind 
Association believes the prize was won 
thanks to its easy navigation, accessibility and 
its unwillingness to compromise on visual 
appeal.

Treea Cracknell, a web producer at Synergy, 
the site's designer, said, "Our brief was it had 
to be visually exciting and we didn't realise 
that not all visually impaired people weren't 
blind and preferred graphical sites."

Roberts said that she thinks at least one of the 
judges was particularly impressed by its 
adaptability to the needs of the user including 
sighted ones.


GLOVES FOR SIGNING – PART TWO

Following our appeal for information on a 
glove used for deafblind signing (E-Access 
Bulletin, February 2001) Jim Valk, an 
Adjustment Counselor at the Rehabilitation 
Center for the Blind, Daytona Beach, Florida 
writes in with some personal recollections of 
the method.

"I recall that in the 1960s I worked with a 
deaf-blind gentleman who used that method", 
Valk says. "I do not know where he learned it 
but I vividly remember the glove he used.  It 
was a fairly light cotton glove, and the letters 
had been inscribed by hand with a pen.  It 
appeared that the positions of the letters 
related to the knuckled and finger bones and 
to some extent also the palm of his hand.

"Walter was not deaf from birth, thus he was 
able to respond vocally.  I have had virtually 
no experience communicating with 
congenitally deaf-blind folks, but believe that 
the glove method, as I described it, might be 
less satisfactory unless they had mastered 
speech. 

"I have no idea if these gloves are sold, but it 
appears that plain cotton gloves (white, to 
allow for visible lettering) are perfectly 
practical for adaptation. I believe that 
accomplished communicators using this 
method would not need to use the glove, and 
such communication would afford a really 
intimate sense of communication. 
Communicating experiences and ideas by 
touch directly with another human is beyond 
the range of most people's experience, but it 
surely made me feel very close and very loyal 
to Walter."


BROWSER LAUNCHES THROUGH 
PORTAL.

A free talking Internet browser for visually 
impaired people has been launched by 
WeMedia, a US company that runs a portal 
for disabled people.

Though recognising that it is an admirable 
first effort, people who have tried it complain 
it is too verbose and the speech is too slow 
for someone who needs to use voice synthesis 
regularly. Among its more irritating foibles is 
to say, "I will now read the title for you," 
before reading a title.

The software can be downloaded from 
http://www.wemedia.com

[Section One ends.]


NEWS IN BRIEF.

REFRESHABLE BRAILLE: The Adult 
Services Programme in British Colombia 
(http://www.aett.gov.bc.ca/adultspecialed/) is 
keen to hear from developers and users of 
refreshable Braille devices as part of an 
extensive trial of refreshable technology. To 
join a related discussion list send an email 
message saying 'subscribe brl-net' to 
marjordomo@bc.cx

SKY PROGRAMME GUIDE: BSkyB, the 
pay television company, has introduced a 
programme guide that is delivered by email, 
promising greater accessibility than the 
electronic guide delivered to the television. 
To subscribe email diginews-epg-
subscribe@yahoogroups.com

EVENTS: On 18 April a seminar entitled 
'Maximum access: missing markets in digital 
media' is being held in London. For more 
information email: 
tom.Campbell@nmk.co.uk
Then on 29 March the Local Government 
Improvement and Development Agency 
(IDeA) is hosting a conference tackling 
technology access issues faced by local 
councils. For more information email: 
hilary.tanner@idea.gov.uk


SECTION TWO: ANALYSIS.
- COPYRIGHT.

BLIND COPYING.
By David Mann  david.mann@rnib.org.uk

In March, the UK government's Patent 
Office, part of the Department of Trade and 
Industry (DTI), finally published its long-
awaited consultation paper called 'Exception 
to copyright for the benefit of visually 
impaired people'.

The document explores options for changes 
in the law affecting the production of 
alternative formats such as digital files for 
copyright works in all situations - at home, in 
the workplace, in school or library. It covers 
activities by individuals and small 
organisations as well as by larger agencies.

Currently, under the Copyright Design and 
Patents Act 1988 blind and visually impaired 
people are in a doubtful legal position when 
downloading information from the Internet 
and turning it into braille and other alternative 
format media, even when the information is 
in the public domain and even when it is 
provided by public bodies and utilities. The 
very act of digital capture of the material, 
even for the sole purpose of making it 
accessible, could be deemed illegal unless the 
rights holders specifically allows it.

The government appears to be proposing a 
two-pronged solution under which nobody 
would need to seek permission for the 
creation of single accessible format versions 
for identifiable individuals. Where a multiple 
copy licence is not available, the consultation 
paper recommends that people should not be 
prevented from making multiple copies.

The initial response of the RNIB is to decry 
any reliance on licences. It feels that not only 
is it inappropriate to license what should be a 
basic right, but the fact that a licence might 
be available does not mean it would be on 
satisfactory terms.

As E-Access Bulletin went to press, the 
Publishers' Licensing Society 
(http://www.pls.org.uk) and a number of 
other groups moved to partially pre-empt any 
ultimate legislation on copyright access by 
releasing the 'VIP guidelines', which waive 
their right to be asked for permission when 
single accessible format versions of 
copyrighted material are being produced for 
identifiable individuals.

This is an extremely positive development, 
and will be of particular benefit to small 
voluntary groups and libraries, even though it 
has as yet no statutory backing and individual 
rights owners retain the right to opt out.

The digital access charity HumanITy 
(http://www.humanity.org.uk) has welcomed 
the government consultation process as 
"eminently superior to reliance on agreements 
with individual authors and publishers".

However, HumanITy's director Kevin Carey 
said it was "a matter of deep regret that such 
access has not been included in the European 
Union Copyright Directive still under 
discussion". And he added: "As they 
currently stand, discussions between 
alternative format producers and the licensing 
regime have produced a proposed protocol 
more onerous than that which currently 
operates and so the consultation paper is 
unduly optimistic".

Carey says that much confusion has arisen 
between the fundamental right to access 
information and the occasional discretionary 
privilege of accessing it for free.

The essence of the latter point is that, where 
sighted people must pay to access 
information, there is no reason why visually 
impaired people should not pay as well, 
although they should perhaps pay less, since 
some of a work's value (for example book 
illustrations) is lost in translation to other 
formats.

To avoid endless discussions over every 
copyright work, Carey says the government 
should establish guidelines on the price to be 
paid for access via alternative formats. 
Authors could waive this if they wished.

Carey says fears among copyright holders 
that alternative format production will lead to 
an increase in pirating of material are not 
backed up by evidence. "On this basis, 
technical blocks [to alternative format files] 
are a tedious, injurious and insulting 
irrelevance," he says.

Developments in the UK are set against an 
equally confused international background.

In December 2000, a delegation representing 
the World Blind Union approached the World 
Intellectual Property Organisation to ask it to 
encourage the introduction of provisions for 
blind and partially sighted people into the 
copyright legislation of all countries. The 
representatives also explained that an 
accumulation of national provisions was in 
itself inadequate, and an international 
arrangement needed to be reached if the 
electronic age was to bring its full potential to 
all.

On the first of these points, some progress 
was made, with WIPO pledging to examine 
ways of encouraging countries, particularly 
developing countries, to introduce appropriate 
measures into their national legislation.

Less comfort was offered on the international 
front. WIPO treaties do not enshrine access 
rights, and any change to this approach would 
have to be agreed unanimously by all 
signatories. This would clearly be an 
extremely tall order, and the delegation's 
leaders concluded that the best way forward 
would be to prepare proposals for new 
international 'understandings' for WIPO to 
consider backing as a starting-point.

The delegation also drew attention to the 
importance of audio-description of films and 
television programmes for blind and visually 
impaired people, and of ensuring that 
provisions on moral rights did not allow 
performers to object to this practice per se, 
while retaining the right to object to low 
standard audio-description if it distorted their 
performance.

WIPO is currently negotiating a treaty on 
audio-visual rights, which includes an 'agreed 
statement' on what could constitute distortion 
of a performer's work. The organisation 
claims this means artists cannot object to an 
audio-described version of their work. 
However, the World Blind Union regards it 
as a fudged outcome which will disappoint 
those fighting for the rights of blind and 
visually impaired people in a rapidly-
changing technological environment.

* Additional reporting by Dan Jellinek

* The UK government consultation document 
is at:
http://www.patent.gov.uk/consultations/visual
ly_impaired/index.htm
or email teresa.arnesen@patent.gov.uk or 
telephone: 020 7596 6513


[Section two ends.]


SECTION THREE: ADVENTURE.
- POLAR EXPLORATION.

JOURNEY TO THE EDGE OF THE WEB.
By Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

Zimbabwe-born Miles Hilton-Barber's recent 
bid to be the first blind man to reach the 
South Pole showed how the Internet could be 
used to involve people in one man's 
adventure. But his journey also showed how 
old-fashioned technologies, ranging from 
two-way radio to cosmetic mirrors, were still 
very much needed to push the boundary of 
the Internet to ends of the earth.

Challenging Horizons 
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/horizons/), a section 
of the RNIB site dedicated to derring-do, 
provided news and background information 
and a place to email the expedition team. 
During the expedition itself around 5,000 
people a month tracked Hilton-Barber's 
southerly progress online.

The usage levels were given a helping hand 
by strong traditional media interest in the 
expedition, which the site's organisers tried to 
foster. Among the eclectic range of 
organisations to cover the story were The 
Sun, The Mirror, The Guardian, Channel Five 
and Christian World, together with a host of 
web sites dedicated to exploration. According 
to the expedition's PR manager the media 
campaign was helped by the ability to send 
weekly interview questions to Hilton-Barber.

The site also offered the chance to donate 
cash to the expedition online, a feature an 
unusually high proportion of visitors people 
used. Most sites find it extremely difficult to 
instil enough confidence to enter credit card 
details online. Puttick believes visitors to the 
RNIB site were particularly willing to give 
because of the relatively high level of trust 
instilled by the RNIB and the extreme nature 
of Hilton-Barber's challenge.

Perhaps the most surprising, given the slick 
Internet publicity, was that the technology 
used by the explorers themselves was 
relatively crude. Hilton-Barber said that the 
most useful piece of guidance equipment 
were the ends of his ski-tips, which he could 
use to sense the nature of the terrain 
immediately ahead of him. He also has stories 
of an aircraft landing system relying on local 
women marking the edge of a blue-ice 
runway with cosmetic mirrors while a man on 
a skidoo shouted wind speeds to a radio 
operator in a tent.

The team had originally hoped to be able to 
communicate directly with home base using a 
satellite link-up, but unfortunately the 
Inmarsat satellite service they planned to use 
was not in service. So unlike sailors, like 
Hilton-Barber's brother who recently became 
the first blind man to sail solo from the US to 
Australia or round-the-world yachtswoman 
Ellen MacArthur, the team was unable to 
stream live video footage of the trip.

Also, without a direct satellite linkup, emails 
submitted to the web site could not be sent to 
the Antarctic team directly. Instead they had 
to be forwarded to the expedition's coastal 
base in Patriot Hills where they were relayed 
over short wave radio. The radios were also 
used to send back temperature and mileage 
updates for navigation purposes and for 
inclusion on the site.

Hilton-Barber said they had also looked at 
various pieces of hardware to make 
communication between team members 
easier, among them an avalanche detector and 
a miniaturised microphone and earpiece 
system. In the end, though, they all turned out 
to be "too finicky", so the team turned back to 
large old-fashioned two-way radios.

In the end Hilton-Barber was forced to 
abandon his attempt on the pole before he 
made it because he succumbed to frost bite of 
the fingers. But this has not stopped people 
sending hundreds of emails of congratulations 
through the web site, Puttick says.

Ultimately the plan is to replace the polar 
expedition information featured on the 
Challenging Horizon's portion of the RNIB 
web site with other exploits of this nature. 
Hilton-Barber looks set to take centre stage 
once again, with plans to take part in the 200 
kilometre Silk Run in China, a marathon 
following the course of the Silk Road. That is 
unless someone can come up with any more 
daring ideas.

[Section three ends.]


SECTION FOUR: MEDIA REGULATION.
- CONVERGENCE.

COMMUNICATIONS WHITE PAPER.
By Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

The UK government's recent communications 
white paper "fails to deliver adequate 
consideration to the needs and interests of 
blind and partially sighted people, and of 
older and disabled people in general," 
according to an official response published by 
the RNIB.

Though it supports the general idea of a 
single regulatory body, the RNIB concludes 
that the regulator proposed in the bill, Ofcom, 
would not have the clout to make sure the 
necessary level of access is available. The 
institute criticises the bill's failure to employ 
primary legislation and licence conditions to 
ensure access compliance, saying this 
weakness would mean universal access to 
post-switchover public service broadcasting 
and the Internet will not be met.

Disappointment was also expressed that the 
bill did not contain the means to enforce Web 
Accessibility Initiative (WAI) standards even 
on the government's own web sites. The 
RNIB recommends government sites be 
required to meet at least level one of WAI 
web content accessibility, the lowest grade 
handed out by WAI. It also says the 
government should legislate to ensure all 
communications companies with web 
presences to do the same.

Another criticism levelled at the bill is that it 
has a limited view of access difficulties. 
Section 5.2.1 of the bill says "everyone now 
has access to radio and television 
programmes," a statement the RNIB believes 
is untrue. To help improve the situation it is 
recommending that a future bill requires 
digital television providers to dedicate a 
channel to audio descriptions.

The RNIB also takes exception to the bill's 
propagation of "the myth that the cheapness 
of ICT technology equates currently to full 
accessibility and usability". It points out that 
the inaccessibility of mobile phones and set-
top boxes means those they exclude miss out 
on subsidised access. The RNIB suggests 
Ofcom helps visually impaired and blind 
people make better choices of technology by 
encouraging ISPs and digital television 
providers to promote their services 
specifically to these people.

According to the RNIB it is economically or 
legally tenable to exclude people from voting 
on-line or receiving medical advice or vital 
health information through an interactive 
digital television. It would ultimately be 
cheaper to provide these services online. It 
would also be unfair, says the RNIB, if 
sighted people registering tax returns or civic 
licences on-line receive financial rewards 
denied to other who cannot access these 
online facilities.

The proposed powers for Ofcom over 
electronic programme guides, which help 
people navigate digital television services 
with hundreds of channels, was said to ignore 
problems they cause for visually impaired 
people. Ofcom must enforce clear guidelines 
on how such information is presented for 
visually impaired people. The white paper 
also ignores the fact that radio receivers will 
become more complex and more inaccessible 
to visually impaired people too. The RNIB 
called on Ofcom to ensure they were 
accessible to the visually impaired.

The white paper is online at:
http://www.communicationswhitepaper.
gov.uk

[Section four ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-
mail eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe 
eab' in the subject header. You can list other 
email addresses to subscribe in the body of 
the message. Please encourage all your 
colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe 
eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads 
to Dan Jellinek at: dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. 
http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin may 
be reproduced in full as long as all parts 
including this copyright notice are included. 
Sections of the report may be quoted as long 
as they are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-
access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  
phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  
tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  
humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
