E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National 
Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind 
Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-
subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts.]

ISSUE 17, MAY 2001.

IN THIS ISSUE:
Section One: News.
- Tesco site bags new RNIB award; Free 
and fair elections?; Internet access 
experiences wanted; Physics via screen 
readers and rubber bands; Test-drive an 
online course; Radio listeners group – 
update; Sight village 2001; Ricability 
report online.

Section Two: Profile
- Cearbhall O'Meadhra.

Section Three: Legal Focus
- Olympics Website.

Section Four: Reader Response
- Colour Testers.

[Contents ends.]


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

TESCO SITE BAGS NEW RNIB 
AWARD.

The supermarket chain Tesco has 
picked-up a newly-created RNIB 'See It 
Right' award for 'Tesco Access', an 
accessible site for ordering groceries 
launched this week 
(http://www.tesco.com/access).

The supermarket plans to back up the 
site by training staff and giving them 
more time to unpack and describe goods 
for visually impaired customers.

Tesco has not always been strong on 
accessibility: last year the RNIB lent its 
voice to a campaign urging the company 
to offer an accessible version of its web 
site. Once Tesco had decided to heed 
protesters' calls, the site took around six 
months to develop.

Among Tesco's competitors, Asda told 
E-Access Bulletin it has no plans to 
create an accessible version of its web 
site. Sainsbury's online shopping site is 
frames-based, making it difficult to use 
with screen reading software.

According to the RNIB the See It Right 
award will be given to both commercial 
and none commercial web sites as and 
when they are found to meet RNIB 
access standards.


FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS?

Polls Apart 3, a campaign to highlight 
disabled peoples' right to vote, is 
inviting people to send in their 
assessment of the accessibility of their 
local polling office through its new web 
site (http://www.pa3.org.uk). 

The campaign has been launched by the 
disability charity Scope with support 
from the Disability Rights Commission. 
The web site will be used to publish real-
time findings from each constituency as 
they come in on Election Day, June 7.

The campaigners hope the convenience 
of the online survey will mean more 
people participate than in two previous 
paper-only surveys. On and offline 
responses are expected from two thirds 
of UK election constituencies.

Scope plans to go on to use the results to 
name and shame councils that fail to 
make adequate provision for accessible 
voting. The charity is an advocate of 
pilot schemes to improve the lot of 
disabled voters, including trial of 
electronic voting techniques. 

In the 1997 General Election, some 94% 
of disabled people surveyed encountered 
one or more barriers that could have 
prevented them from being able to cast 
their vote. On average there are 13,000 
disabled people in each UK 
constituency.


INTERNET ACCESS EXPERIENCES 
WANTED!

E-Access Bulletin is planning a series of 
articles investigating the practical 
problems faced by visually impaired 
people seeking Internet access for the 
first time. We will concentrate on four 
issues: cost; sources of financial 
assistance; specialist training; and 
providers of technical support.

To anchor this research in people's real 
experiences we would be extremely 
grateful for readers' input. So, please, 
email your experiences, observations, 
advice and opinions to Phil Cain on 
phil@headstar.com


PHYSICS VIA SCREEN READERS 
AND RUBBER BANDS.

The latest in John M Williams' regular 
assistive technology columns in the 
Internet magazine BusinessWeek Online 
offers a fascinating insight into the work 
of one of the world's leading blind 
physicists, Kent Cullers.

Cullers, senior researcher at the Search 
for Extra Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) 
Institute in California, uses both new and 
old technologies to help him in his work, 
ranging from raised-line drawing kits 
using rubber bands and wax to the latest 
in Braille pads and screen readers.

For more on the technology Cullers uses 
to design alien-hunting radio telescopes 
see:
http://businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflas
h/may2001/nf20010516_176.htm


TEST-DRIVE AN ONLINE COURSE.

Duncans, an online learning company 
based in Saskatchewan, Canada, is 
looking for visually impaired people to 
test its online courses.

Around 600 courses are being offered 
for free to access testers for 60 days, 
including ones in computing, business 
and personal skills. Duncans' courses 
generally cost between 69 and 149 
Canadian dollars a year.

Anyone interested is asked to email one 
or two paragraphs on their background 
to admin@duncans.ca The company 
(http://www.duncans.ca) is also 
interested to hear from technical 
consultants and staff from organisations 
working in the access field.


RADIO LISTENERS GROUP - 
UPDATE.

In our last issue (April 2001) we 
featured a piece about a radio listeners' 
email group started by Visually Impaired 
Radio and Electronics Society (VIRES).

The piece suggested that the online 
community was dedicated to reminiscing 
about bygone radio programmes, but our 
source Clive Lever – a VIRES 
subscriber - points out it is far more 
dynamic than that, and covers all radio-
related topics including the latest 
programmes.

Lever says examples of typical 
discussions cover "which satellite 
stations are about to change frequency, 
who's about to be awarded franchises for 
new stations and what special features 
stations like Radio 4 are running."

To join the group send a blank message 
to:
uk-radio-listeners-
subscribe@yahoogroups.com


SIGHT VILLAGE 2001.

More than 60 specialist companies in 
accessible technology development are 
coming together at the Sight Village 
2001 exhibition in Birmingham this 
summer. Scheduled seminars include 
sessions by the British Computer 
Association of the Blind and suppliers 
demonstrating new products.

The event runs from 17-19 July. For 
further information, see:
http://www.qac.ac.uk/sight.htm


RICABILITY REPORT ONLINE.

The new report from Ricability on the 
new rights disabled people have in 
dealings with telephone companies, 'Its 
your call' (See E-Access Bulletin, March 
2001) is available online at:
http://www.ricability.org.uk
The report is also available in tape, 
Braille and large print on 020 7427 
2460.



[Section One ends.]


SECTION TWO: PROFILE
- Cearbhall O'Meadhra

IRISH EQUALITY COMMISSIONER 
COMES THROUGH THE HARD 
WAY.

Cearbhall O'Meadhra, the first ever blind 
person to be appointed to the Equality 
Authority of Ireland 
(http://www.equality.ie), has come 
through the hard way to emerge a strong 
champion of the rights of the visually 
impaired to access technology.

O'Meadhra is completely blind. He was 
diagnosed at the age of four with retinitis 
pigmentosa - a progressive genetic eye 
condition that affects the retina. He 
started to experience the effects in 1970 
when blindness affected his lower field 
of vision and he became completely 
night blind.

He qualified as an architect in 1969 and 
was a specialist in archaeological 
surveying techniques. Occasionally his 
job would require him to work at night 
which became increasingly difficult - he 
was often only able to hear the voices of 
his fellow colleagues. Eventually the 
difficulties led him to give up 
architecture and follow his love of 
flamenco and qualify as a music teacher 
in Spain.

In 1978, his failing vision caused him to 
fall down a flight of stairs and badly 
injure himself. He returned to Ireland 
and couldn't get work so embarked on a 
course teaching English as a foreign 
language and taught in Dublin for three 
years. His first experience of 
discrimination ended his employment - 
the school received a complaint from an 
Italian agency that the students were 
caused distress being taught by a blind 
teacher so he returned again to music 
and set up a music school.

"I hadn't completely lost my sight but I 
couldn't see books so I learned to make 
music programs and spent a year 
devising a complex 'note speller' 
program to help familiarise students with 
a keyboard."

This was the beginning of his ongoing 
relationship with computers and led him 
to apply for a post at the Bank of Ireland 
in 1983. The bank accepted his 
application on condition that he 
completed a rigorous RNIB 
programming training course, funded by 
the national Rehabilitation Board in 
Ireland.

"My Braille and typing were too slow - 
there were no computer screens or 
terminals so we had to code on typing 
paper which we couldn't see and if we 
made one small error in the code the 
program wouldn't work," says 
O'Meadhra. "There were no sighted 
people to help proof-read our work. 
There was no system for recording 
computer code in Braille so we had to 
set it up ourselves - we were dictated 
code and we tapped it out in Braille. It 
was a 12 week course with strict 
deadlines - and boy did my typing skills 
improve!"

He is scathing about the standard of 
sophisticated computing help available 
from charitable sources. "There is a 
horrible charitable attitude of lie down, 
submit, accept your fate. I've been active 
in the disability field for 16 years and 
witnessed thousands of people going 
through courses but they are not coming 
out with computer skills. I know six 
disabled people who are working.

"There were no courses in the 
commercial sector to explain to blind 
people how things work, so I was stuck 
at the bottom. They don't expect blind 
people to be in the workplace."

Initially employed at the bank as a 
component programmer, O'Meadhra 
soon found his phone became an 
informal 'help line' for people requiring 
information about accessible technology. 
The bank was accommodating and 
created a new post for O'Meadhra as 
assistive technology consultant, with a 
remit to advise on how different types of 
technology can improve the lives of 
visually impaired and blind people.

A year after he started with the bank, he 
and two other visually impaired people 
established the Visually Impaired 
Computer Society 
(http://www.iol.ie/~vics) to meet the 
needs of partially sighted and blind 
programmers. VICS works with 
software developers and employers to 
ensure that people with sight problems 
have access to technology.

The arrival of Windows 95 infuriated 
members of the society as it was 
completely inaccessible to people with 
visual impairments. VICS joined US 
campaigners in their campaign to make 
the software accessible.

As a result Microsoft has taken steps to 
improve its accessibility record - 
Microsoft even boasts an accessibility 
site with resources and information for 
those with disabilities 
(http://www.microsoft.com/enable/). 
Among the factors that persuaded 
Microsoft to act were rumours that the 
US defence forces would not buy the 
product if it were not made accessible to 
the blind.

O'Meadhra has recently been granted a 
two-year secondment from the bank to 
concentrate on his further role as 
chairman at the Irish Institute of Design 
and Disability - a body that represents 
the needs and rights of disabled people 
to lead a normal life (http://www.idd.ie). 
The UK has a sister organisation to the 
IDD - the Institute for Inclusive Design 
(http://www.ukiid.org).

He is currently hard at work at the 
Institute of Design and Disability 
seeking to promote the adoption of the 
Barcelona declaration 
(http://www.idd.ie/Barcelona_Declaratio
n.htm) by all local authorities in Eire and 
Northern Ireland. The government has 
provided funding of 300,000 Irish Punts 
over three years to aid wider 
implementation of the declaration, which 
aims to promote inclusion and 
accessibility throughout all regions in 
which it has been signed.

Among his many other tasks for the 
institute, he built the organisation's web 
site in 10 days. In building the site 
O'Meadhra deliberately set out to see if 
he could build it without HTML, so he 
used Microsoft's FrontPage and hit 
another problem with the corporations 
software. He found that the hierarchical 
navigational structure of the program 
was difficult for a blind person to 
organise.  He has since published a 
report highlighting his experience using 
FrontPage to design a website, which 
will be available at the VICS website 
shortly.

The institute's motto is 'Good design 
enables, bad design disables'. "My 
ultimate aim is to see industry and 
design schools teaching accessible 
design. You have to expect the disabled 
person to be a user and cater for 
everybody," O'Meadhra says. 

"Everything I've wanted to do I've had to 
climb a high wall. There is significant 
discrimination in Ireland. It takes twice 
as much work to achieve a managerial 
level - the exams aren't even in an 
accessible format. There's a general shift 
in the right direction but it's still 
obstructed. We've got a long way to go."

[Section two ends.]


SECTION THREE: LEGAL FOCUS
- Olympics website.

AUSTRALIAN CASE IS WARNING 
FOR WEB DESIGNERS.

* In August 2000 the Sydney Organising 
Committee for the Olympic Games 
(SOCOG) was found to have engaged in 
unlawful conduct by providing a web 
site which was to a significant extent 
inaccessible to the blind (see E-Access 
Bulletin issues 9, 10 and 11). In this 
article Tom Worthington, one of the 
expert witnesses called in this landmark 
case, describes how complainant Bruce 
Maguire won the day.

On 7 June 1999, the blind sports fan 
Bruce Maguire made a complaint to the 
Australian Human Rights and Equal 
Opportunity Commission 
(http://www.hreoc.gov.au) that he was 
unlawfully discriminated against by 
SOCOG in their failure to provide a web 
site which was accessible to him.

As part of the case, at the request of the 
Public Interest Advocacy Centre, two 
expert witnesses prepared reports for 
Maguire on the accessibility of the 
Olympics website. The witnesses were 
Jutta Treviranus, manager of the 
Adaptive Technology Resource Centre 
at the University of Toronto, and myself.

During the case, SOCOG did not supply 
technical details about the web site 
requested by the complainant's experts, 
claiming the information was "highly 
commercially sensitive information". At 
another stage SOCOG argued that 
responsibility for any problems with the 
site lay with its contractor, US 
technology giant IBM. However, this 
was not accepted and no complaint was 
made against IBM.

Technical details requested were a 
sample page in electronic format from 
the proposed Results Table on the 
SOCOG website relating to the Olympic 
Games; the content plan for the Olympic 
website; the number of templates to be 
used; the details of the tools used to 
generate the pages of the Olympic 
website; and detailed calculations of 
certain 'ball park' figures.

As this information was not supplied, it 
was necessary for the experts to examine 
the information which was available on 
the site to evaluate the design and 
estimate the cost and time needed to 
make the site accessible.

The 'Bobby' web-based tool 
(http://www.cast.org/bobby) was used to 
test three selected web pages for 
acessibility. The pages were displayed 
using Internet Explorer (Version 5.0 for 
Windows 95), with image display 
switched off to simulate use by a blind 
person. The display of the web pages 
was inspected for usability and then an 
examination of the HTML source code 
made.

Use of the Bobby tool proved difficult, 
due to the extensive use of frames on the 
site, requiring each frame to be 
submitted separately. Based on the 
inspection the conclusion was that the 
SOCOG Web Site was inaccessible to 
the blind for three main reasons:

First, descriptive 'ALT' text tags were 
not included on all images. As an 
example the graphic at the top of the 
page which linked to 'home' had no 
caption.

Second, tables were not laid out so as to 
be read in a linear way. Tables contained 
multiple lines of wrapped text, which 
access devices like Braille readers would 
read unintelligibly across the rows.

And third, the 'Sports home page' carried 
a list of sports in one large image map, 
which was unreadable by non-text 
readers.

In the absence of the technical 
information requested from SOCOG, a 
number of assumptions were made to 
estimate the cost of changing the web 
site for accessibility.

Based on the games' format of 300 
events across 28 sports with some extra 
templates needed for general pages it 
was estimated a total of 357 web 
templates would be needed. It was 
further assumed that the tools used to 
design the web site have provision for 
usability options such as the inclusion of 
'ALT' tags, and therefore no additional 
cost was included for new tools.

Finally, an estimate of just over three 
weeks for one web developer to assess 
the templates, make the changes and 
carry out tests was calculated. The cost 
of the changes on the basis of a 
consultant's rate per day of 1,900 US 
Dollars was therefore estimated at 
29,450 Dollars.

The decision was delivered 24 August 
2000, with SOCOG found to have 
breached section 24 of the Australian 
Disability Discrimination Act 1992. 
HREOC dismissed claims by the 
committee that the cost and difficulty in 
providing an accessible site would 
impose on the respondent "a level of 
hardship which could not be justified".

It dismissed claims that the number of 
templates was as high as 1,295 and that 
the reformatting of templates would take 
hours each - "a more realistic estimate 
for the minor changes required is 10 
minutes each . . . the cost of making the 
site accessible is a modest amount."

A declaration that SOCOG do all that 
was necessary to render its web site 
accessible by the commencement of the 
Olympic Games was therefore issued. 
Subsequently, on 6 November 2000 
(after the Olympics) the web site was 
found to only be partly compliant and 
20,000 Australian Dollars was awarded 
in damages, which SOCOG paid.

It should be noted that no web designers 
from IBM or SOCOG gave evidence to 
the commission as to who, how or why 
the web site was designed the way it 
was.

The Australian Internet Industry 
Association (http://www.iia.net.au) 
subsequently warned that the SOGOC 
decision meant: "Disability access is a 
serious consideration for any Australian 
business wanting to establish a presence 
on the Internet. Sites which target 
customers overseas might also be liable 
under equivalent legislation in the US, 
Canada, the UK and elsewhere."

However, there is little indication that 
Australian corporations are taking the 
threat seriously.

* Tom Worthington is an independent 
electronic business consultant and a 
Visiting Fellow in the Department of 
Computer Science at the Australian 
National University. This article is based 
on a paper he is due to present at INET 
2001, the Internet Society Conference on 
8 June in Stockholm - 
http://www.isoc.org/inet2001


[Section three ends.]

SECTION FOUR: READER 
RESPONSE
- Colour Testers.

COLOURFUL LANGUAGE.

There has been a huge response from 
readers to last issue's query from David 
Porter about a hand-held device to help 
blind people select clothes to wear 
without choosing clashing colours, by 
emitting sound signals (E-Access 
Bulletin, April 2001).

Fred Gissoni of the American Printing 
House for the Blind (APH), was one of 
many writing in with details of a device 
manufactured by the Austrian company 
Caretec known as 'ColorTest'. In the US, 
it is sold by his organisation at a price of 
595 US Dollars (see 
http://sun1.aph.org/products/colortes.ht
m).

He says the device is approximately 15 
centimetres long, 4cm wide and 3cm 
thick. It is powered by a rechargeable 
battery. On the face of the device near 
the sensing end are two buttons, one 
convex and one concave. When the 
convex button is pressed, a digitised 
voice announces the name of a colour 
from a library of about 150 (versions are 
available in several languages). When 
the concave button is pressed, 
information is given on three other 
aspects of the colour: brightness, hue 
and saturation.

'Brightness', presented on a scale from 
zero to 9.9, represents the amount of 
reflected light in the colour. 'Hue' tells 
where within the visual spectrum the 
observed colour falls. red is 3, blue 6, 
green 9 and yellow 12 - so for example a 
reading of 7.5 might be turquoise. 
'Saturation' is an indication of the 
strength or depth of colour.

If one presses the 'eye' of the instrument 
against a bit of clothing and holds down 
the convex button, a tone is heard. By 
moving the end of the instrument over 
the surface, variation in tone can aid in 
determining information about whether a 
garment is solid, striped or of another 
pattern, although precise detail is not 
available.

Gissoni has personal experience of the 
device. "My wife and I have used the 
device for upwards of three years and, 
despite some shortcomings, are pleased 
with it. It enables us to perform tasks 
that would otherwise be impossible."

In the UK, this same device is marketed 
as the 'Colourtest-150' by Vis-ability 
(http://ww.vis-ability.co.uk). Richard 
West is a UK user: "It is a hand-held 
device, rather like a torch. It worked 
fairly well, but had a price tag of several 
hundred pounds [it currently retails at 
450 UK Pounds], so I never felt it worth 
getting. However, for a blind person 
living alone, it might have sufficient 
benefit to justify the expenditure.

Several other readers wrote in to 
recommend ColorTest. They included 
Lindy van der Merwe of Johannesburg, 
South Africa, who says: "It is a truly 
wonderful device that not enough 
visually impaired people know about. 
The ColorTest can also detect a source 
of light, thus enabling me, as a totally 
blind person, to find out if lights are on 
or off. I have even used it to identify the 
colour of the roses in my garden.

"However, although the device can 
identify colours, it will still be up to the 
person to decide which colours go 
together. It might for instance be a good 
idea to try and find some information on 
the matching of colours in books."

Other advocates included E Marie-Lewis 
who says ColorTest is "extremely 
reliable"; Pratik Patel, Project Manager 
at CUNY Assistive Technology 
Services, who calls it "an excellent 
device"; and Anna Dresner.

Robert Mortimer wrote in with a useful 
link to the 'Talking Products' section of 
the American web site Independent 
Living Aids:
http://www.marcom.nu/vhosts/Independ
entLivingAids/Talking_Products.html
Not only can you buy a 'Talking Color 
Identifier' here (which appears to be the 
ColorTest device under a different 
name) but also a range of other devices 
from talking money identifiers to talking 
compasses and talking thermometers.

Peter Meijer, inventor of the auditory 
'soundscape' device 'vOICe' (see E-
Access Bulletin, Issue 13, January 2001) 
wrote in to point out that his invention 
could also be used to describe colours.

"You can use The vOICe auditory 
display software 
(http://www.seeingwithsound.com/winv
oice.htm) with a cheap colour web-cam 
to have the colour spoken of whatever is 
at the centre of the camera view."

He also sends in a link to a 
comprehensive table comparing all sorts 
of other light probes and colour sensors, 
maintained by Tiresias, at:
http://www.dinf.org/tiresias/Equipment/e
b14table.htm

Finally, Janet Wicks, wrote in to 
mention that the UK company Lextile 
Braille has developed a way of putting 
Braille labels on clothing. For further 
information contact Chris Macmillan on: 
0118 926 5450.

[Section four ends.]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly 
bulletin, e-mail eab-subs@headstar.com 
with 
'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You 
can list other email addresses to 
subscribe in the body of the message. 
Please encourage all your colleagues to 
sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 
'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or 
leads to Dan Jellinek at: 
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. 
http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin 
may be 
reproduced in full as long as all parts 
including this copyright notice are 
included. 
Sections of the report may be quoted as 
long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken 
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly 
email newsletter', and our web site 
address 
http://www.e-accessibility.com is also 
cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  
dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  
phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  
tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  
humanity@atlas.co.uk 


[Issue ends.]
