* E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
and the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

NOTE: As a navigation aid to those using screen readers, all headings 
now begin with an asterisk and end with a full stop. Please let us know if 
there is anything else we could do to make navigation of the bulletin 
easier.

[Issue starts.]

* ISSUE 23, NOVEMBER 2001.

* CONTENTS.

Section one: News.

- New Olympics web site reopens controversy

- Signs of life detected at UK government disability site

- XP offers memory hungry wizard

- VoiceXML standard greeted with outcry

- University of Washington to host US national access centre

News in brief: Nystagmus Network relaunches site; Braille in the digital 
age; Tactile printer launched. 

Section two: 'the inbox'
- A compilation of readers' emails.

Section three: Child development: gaps in the education system.

Section four: Europe: an ever more accessible union on the web?

Section five: Accessible games: virtual reality nailbiter.

[Contents end.]


* SECTION ONE - NEWS.

* NEW OLYMPICS WEB SITE REOPENS CONTROVERSY.

Concerns are surfacing about the inaccessibility to people with 
disabilities of the Salt Lake City Winter Olympics web site, prompting 
many to wonder if the Olympic movement has learned any lessons from 
a damning tribunal ruling against it in Australia last year.

Following the Sydney Olympics and Paralympics of 2000, blind web 
user Bruce Maguire was awarded 20,000 Australian dollars in damages 
against the games' organising committee when the Australian Human 
Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission found the inaccessibility of 
the games' web site had caused Maguire undue "pain and suffering". 
Inaccessible sites do not allow blind people using text-to-speech 
converters or others using special software to access the information they 
need.

Now concern is being expressed on accessibility email lists that the 
organising committee of the forthcoming Winter Olympics, due to start 
on 8 February 2002, do not appear to have heeded the Australian case.

The reported shortcomings of the official games site at 
http://www.slc2002.org include the fact that not all images carry text tags 
and titles; inaccessible technologies such as javascript and Flash as used 
without alternatives being offered; metadata is not used to add 
information about pages; users are not warned wherever pop-up browser 
windows are used; page frames are used without titles; and not all audio 
files have captions.

There are also problems with clarity of text, some of which is placed 
over photographic images and is hard to read even for someone without 
visual impairment. On the other hand, the site appears to work well with 
some screen readers, and some accessibility features are present, such as 
text transcripts for videos. 

Accessibility expert Joe Clark (http://www.joeclark.org) says many of 
the site's problems are relatively minor, and there are still many weeks 
left in which changes could be made. If the changes are not made, 
however, Clark warns that the Australian case could come back to haunt 
the US organisers.

"Human rights cases are international by definition. The principles of 
accommodating people with disabilities short of undue burden or 
hardship are essentially identical in the US, Australia and many other 
nations, so the Sydney case stands as an international precedent," he 
says. "The International Olympic Committee would be foolish to make 
the same mistake twice."

Some observers are harsher still. Another leading accessibility expert 
who asked to remain anonymous said: "Given the action against the 
Olympic site by the Australian authorities, the fact that the Salt Lake 
City site is not accessible shows a disregard for people with disabilities 
that is at best callous, and at worst deliberate."

Although doubts surround the applicability of the Australian ruling in US 
courts, America has its own law under which aggrieved people could act, 
the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm). Under the act 
organisations that do not make their facilities accessible can face fines of 
up to 50,000 US dollars.

On a more positive note, the organising committee for the Athens 
Olympic Summer Games in 2004 seems set to be the first to fully 
embrace the issue of web accessibility. A spokesperson for the Athens 
committee told E-Access Bulletin this week that it was currently 
redesigning its site (http://www.athens.olympic.org/en - though at the 
time of writing the site had been taken down doe work) and that, "In a 
second phase, [the committee] is planning to make it accessible for 
people with disabilities."

NOTE: For our past coverage of the Sydney case, see bulletin issues 9, 
10, 11 and 17. And for Joe Clark's analysis of the new controversy, see:
http://www.contenu.nu/article.htm?id=1202


* SIGNS OF LIFE DETECTED AT GOVERNMENT SITE.

The UK government's long neglected web gateway for information and 
consultation on disability policy, the 'Disability – on the agenda' site at 
http://www.disability.gov.uk, is due to finally relaunch in a new format 
in January, E-Access Bulletin has learned.

For the best part of a year the site has contained the same basic data and 
links along with a message stating: "The http://www.disability.gov.uk 
site is being updated."

The site was caught in limbo when its parent department, the former 
Department of Social Security, underwent a transformation after the last 
election into the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP).

A hiatus followed while the new department settled down, but a 
spokesperson said this week that the DWP's disability unit was finally 
set to relaunch the site with strong ministerial backing early in the New 
Year.

Those who check the site from time to time hoping for signs of life will 
be relieved to no longer find that the most recent feature on the 'What's 
new' page refers to a government consultation on a new code of practice 
under the Disability Discrimination Act which took place in May 2000.


* XP OFFERS MEMORY-HUNGRY WIZARD

Access technology developers and users are hard at work adapting to 
Windows XP, the new Microsoft operating system launched last month.

RNIB communications officer John Welsman, who switched to 
Windows XP when it was first released, is finding the system is 
noticeably more stable. It also contains some useful tools including a 
software 'wizard' to make setting up accessibility features more 
straightforward.

It has not all been plain sailing, however. Dialogue boxes, for instance, 
take a little bit of getting used to, Welsman says, with more of them 
being presented in web page format than before. Welsman also says XP 
is even more memory-hungry than its predecessors and recommends 
users equip themselves with at least 128 megabytes of 'RAM' memory.

Access software developers have not all modified their programs to cope 
with the new operating system, though there is a test release available of 
an XP-compatible version of the popular JAWS screen reader 
(http://www.freedomscientific.com). Close competitor WindowEyes 
(http://www.gwmicro.com/windoweyes/windoweyes.htm) is expected to 
release an XP compatible version in January.

Both, however, look likely to be pipped to the post this week by the 
release of an XP-compatible version of Supernova, a combined screen 
reader and magnifier from Dolphin (http://www.dolphinuk.co.uk). It 
remains to be seen if Supernova developers have given themselves 
enough time to iron out every XP wrinkle.


* VOICE STANDARD GREETED WITH OUTCRY.

A draft standard for a language to create voice web sites is being widely 
criticised for undermining the open source philosophy some believe is 
key to the Internet's success.

Although much online discussion surrounding the standard has praised 
its technical merits, unease has arisen because organisations involved in 
drafting specifications have not ruled out charging royalties for using the 
patented technologies implied by the standard. As reported in our last 
issue ('Patently unfair', October 2001) the matter of whether or not such 
charges will be allowed by the web standards body the World Wide Web 
Consortium is a hot potato.

The outlet for much of the discontent over VoiceXML 2.0 has been the 
email discussion group:
http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-voice


* WASHINGTON TO HOST NATIONAL ACCESS CENTRE.

A new US National Centre on Accessible Information Technology, to be 
known as 'AccessIT', is to be created at the University of Washington in 
Seattle.

The project is to be funded from a 3.5 million dollar grant from the US 
government National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research 
(http://www.ed.gov/offices/OSERS/NIDRR) to run over the next five 
years.

The new unit will be jointly headed by Kurt Johnson of the Centre for 
Technology and Sheryl Burgstahler of the university's innovative DO-IT 
project which offers Internet-based mentoring to students with 
disabilities (http://www.washington.edu/doit - and see also our 
November 2000 issue).


*NEWS IN BRIEF:

* NYSTAGMUS SITE: The UK Nystagmus Network has relaunched its 
web site with new sections for children and academic research. 
Nystagmus is characterised by rapid involuntary eye movements that 
often seriously impairs vision:
http://www.nystagmusnet.org

* DANISH MEET: A conference on Braille in the digital age is taking 
place from 16-19 April next year in Copenhagen, Denmark, hosted by 
the country's major blindness groups:
http://www.ibos.dk/braille

* TACTILE PRINTER: Anglia Polytechnic University has developed a 
versatile tactile printing machine which can produce tactile diagrams, 
signs and maps annotated with raised text, Braille or Moon, on a variety 
of materials:
http://www.enterprise.anglia.ac.uk/enterprise/tact01.asp

[Section one ends.]


* SECTION TWO - 'THE INBOX'
- READERS' FORUM.
- Please email all contributions or responses to inbox@headstar.com

* DIGITAL INDEXING. "A major problem that blind students face is 
the dearth of text-books," writes Anthony Bernard from Sri Lanka. 
"Braille books in a third world country like Sri Lanka can be quite 
expensive. Since I retired from my teaching job in February this year, I 
have some free time which I can use to scan books onto CD for blind 
readers. But I do not have the software to compile tables of contents, 
indexed search facilities and so on. Do special software packages exist to 
do this kind of work? I hope someone can send me the relevant 
information." [inbox@headstar.com]

* WHEELCHAIR AID. Long-term bulletin reader David Porter would 
like to hear from anyone who knows of technology that may help blind 
users of powered wheelchairs to see kerbs at the edge of pavements. He 
would also like to find information on a long cane with a light near the 
tip, which a person with severe tunnel vision might use to check the 
ground ahead when it is dark. [inbox@headstsar.com]

* WILCO. Simon Wilkes would like to hear from people who are 
interested in developing accessible Citizens' Band and hand held radio 
equipment. Telephone (UK) 020 8478 5841

* GLUCOMETER UPDATE. Following our recent call for information 
and advice on talking glucometers for people with diabetes who are 
blind, and the excellent reader response (see E-Access bulletin, October 
2001), we have received three further emails offering valuable 
information.

Tim Culhane from Dublin, Ireland writes: "I have recently heard about a 
talking glucometer which has been introduced to Britain and Ireland in 
the last year. It is called the Gluki Plus, manufactured by the Austrian 
company CareTec:
http://www.caretec.at/products/englisch/gluki/gluki.html

"It is designed with the visually impaired in mind, with a large clear 
display, and integrated speech output. The meter itself is quite small and 
very simple to use. Also, you only need a tiny drop of blood for a test.

"The only problem is it costs 700 Irish pounds. However, I'm sure if you 
can show that the device is necessary for you to live independently, 
funding should be available from the NHS or similar bodies in other 
countries."

He adds: "I have been using the 'One touch' meter from LifeScan 
(http://www.lifescan.com) since I was diagnosed with diabetes five years 
ago. This can be attached to a voice synthesiser, and I have found it 
reasonably good. Its main disadvantage is that you have to place the drop 
of blood in a particular spot on the test strip, and you need a large 
amount. The meter plus synthesiser is also quite bulky."

Carolyn Rupe from Perth, Western Australia, adds: "I have been using a 
Gluki Plus Glucometer for about six years now and I have found it to be 
extremely good. It beeps when you have put enough blood on the strip 
and then after 45 seconds it speaks your result.

"The metre is turned on when the strip is inserted into the machine and 
turns off when the strip is removed. The machine is about the size of an 
audio cassette, so it is very portable. It holds the last ten tests in its 
memory so you are able to recall them when you like.

"The cost of these machines in Australia is around 1,250 Australian 
dollars. The machines are also available through the Royal Blind Society 
in New South Wales and Australians can also apply for a lottery grant to 
obtain one."

Finally Virginia Carcedo of CIDAT, the technology centre of the 
Spanish national blindness organisation ONCE, writes: "ONCE in co-
operation with a major company has developed and manufactured the 
'Sonogluco'. It converts into speech the relevant information in the 
visual display of the mainstream glucometer device into which the 
Sonogluco is built, the 'GlucoTouch' [editor's note: this is another 
technology from LifeScan].

"There are now units for six different languages: Spanish, English, 
French, German, Italian and Portuguese. The combined unit costs 197 
euros, plus VAT where appropriate." Further information from:
http://www.once.es/cidat

[Section two ends.]


* SECTION THREE: FOCUS
- CHILD DEVELOPMENT.

* GAPS IN THE SYSTEM.
By Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

Although there are around 22,000 visually impaired children in the UK, 
there is little educational technology or software for such children 
available in mainstream schools. This problem is compounded by a 
shortage of advice for parents on how to make do without such aids.

Under section two of the new Special Educational Needs and Disability 
Act 2001 (http://www.hmso.gov.uk/acts/acts2001/20010010.htm), local 
authorities "must arrange for the parent of any child in their area with 
special educational needs to be provided with advice and information . . . 
relating to those needs".

According to Chris Stevens, special needs manager for the government 
educational technology agency Becta (http://www.becta.org.uk), 
technology for pre-school children in particular receives too little 
attention.

"Becta has done a lot of work on raising awareness of local education 
authorities and software developers", Stevens says. "Awareness is 
growing but there is still a concern among technology providers that 
building in accessibility means it will cost more money," says Stevens.

Olga Miller, children's policy officer at the RNIB, is also concerned. 
"Currently there is no clear route for parents to follow for children to get 
access to technology at home. This continues to be a massive area of 
need. With training parents could do a lot to encourage their children to 
be independent but provision is very poor, with no real central help."

Wendy Sainsbury, national family support officer at 'LOOK' 
(http://www.look.graphicbox.co.uk), a support organisation for families 
with visually impaired children, supports this view.

Although there are a few organisations which distribute grants, such as 
Electronic Aids for the Blind (http://www.eabnet.org.uk) and the 
National Blind Children's Society (http://www.nbcs.org.uk), she says: 
"On the whole children don't have the access that they should have. 
Often where there is provision, children have to share equipment. 
Funding for home access is the biggest problem of all – the situation is a 
complete nightmare as there are not many places families can get 
grants."

Provision of access technology in schools is similarly problematic. Miller 
says there is extremely patchy coverage of access technology caused by 
fragmentation of local education authority funding for the visually 
impaired, whereby each LEA's support services are structured 
differently.

This problem is aggravated, Miller says, by the fact that many schools 
are tied into LEA managed service provider agreements which do not 
offer enough flexibility to allow provision of access equipment. For 
example under the agreements only standard-sized computer screens may 
be available, so schools would find it hard to request larger screens for 
visually impaired children.

Lesley Waddell, senior ICT development officer at the RNIB, agrees: 
"The service provider comes in and installs all the basic hardware but 
access technology is never part of this bundle. It is the responsibility of 
the individual schools to determine what they need which is sometimes 
difficult if people are not aware of the different options available to 
them."

The Department for Education and Science has published the white paper 
'Schools - achieving success' (http://www.dfes.gov.uk/achievingsuccess) 
which promises a restructuring of the LEA and school funding systems 
from 2003-04. Central to this will be a reform of education 'standard 
spending assessments', which will allow for individual LEAs and 
schools to decide what to spend on particular areas of the service.

At present if a child has a special educational needs statement issued by 
an LEA, which is required by law for all who need one, the authority has 
a responsibility to cater for the individual needs of that child. However 
this is a catch-22 situation which means in practice that the quality of the 
provision depends on quality of the statement. "There are so many 
children with woolly statements not worth the paper they're written on 
and then there are very good ones that the LEAs are not providing for," 
Sainsbury says.

Furthermore, although most registered blind children have statements, 
those with partial sight often do not. Nystagmus sufferers are most often 
without statements as the severity of the eye condition can vary from day 
to day. 

The picture is not all bleak, however, and some local authorities offer 
quite good provision and support.

North Yorkshire County Council has a Sensory and Physical Support 
Service and a visual impairment support team 
(http://www.northyorks.gov.uk/pps/sensory/special.shtm). There is a toy 
and equipment lending library for young children, and if the equipment 
looks like it has long-term benefits the service will help parents to access 
funding for their own equipment. Awareness training days for teachers 
and other professionals are also offered.

"The awareness days are very successful, with lots of positive feedback," 
says Janet Pentlow, the vision team's advisory support teacher. "We are 
about to embark on six training days across the county for early 
education providers as an introduction to hearing, visual and physical 
impairment."

One place where schools and education authorities can locate and 
exchange ideas and resources for the education of children with visual 
impairment is the 'inclusion' area of the National Grid for Learning 
(http://www.ngfl.gov.uk), the Becta-run educational web portal 
(http://inclusion.ngfl.gov.uk).

Becta has also recently established a 'VI forum' email discussion list 
whereby educational practitioners can discuss issues relating to the 
teaching of students with visual impairments (to subscribe email 
majordomo@ngfl.gov.uk, leaving the subject blank, with 'subscribe vi-
forum' in the message body).

Through national moves like these it is to be hoped that, as more schools 
and education authorities do begin to improve their practices towards 
teaching visually impaired children, their experiences and resources can 
be shared by all.

[Section three ends.]


* SECTION FOUR: Q&A
- EUROPEAN COMMISSION.

* AN EVER MORE ACCESSIBLE UNION?
By Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

As reported in last month's bulletin, the European Commission has said 
it will begin making the main official EU web portal, 'Europa' 
(http://europa.eu.int), more accessible and is encouraging member states 
to follow suit. E-Access Bulletin has since asked some questions to find 
out where these good intentions might be leading. We reproduce these 
below, along with the answers we received from various commission 
spokespeople.

Q: The commission said in its recent statement that member states and 
European institutions will "take on board" accessibility proposals by end 
of 2001. What does this actually mean?

A: It means the commission and member states have committed 
themselves to adopting the World Wide Web Consortium's Web 
Accessibility Initiative (WAI) content guidelines by the end of 2001. 
This does not mean that all these sites will be compliant - as the 
commission has said, "Europa is a massive site, featuring well over a 
million pages, so the adoption of the guidelines marks the beginning of a 
long compliance process, not the end."

The adoption is a policy decision which must be followed by a major 
implementation program. There are many ways of going about this, 
which is why it is so useful to exchange experiences between the 
commission and member states and benchmark progress. What we do 
know is that this program will take years, and will be part of a wider 
development towards 'Europa second generation'.

To read more about the generation plan click on further reading at: 
http://europa.eu.int/information_society/accessibility

Q: What has been achieved so far?

A: Within the commission, the implementation program has already 
begun. In fact, there are some highly WAI-compliant pages already 
there. Training programs for web designers are also being prepared and 
new web templates developed.

However, resources are not infinite - we aim to ensure that all of the 
100,000 or so new pages published each year from the end of this year 
are compliant. This must obviously be the first priority, otherwise the 
task will just keep getting bigger. The next task would be to tackle the 
1.5 million or so 'old pages' - here, it is unlikely that all pages would be 
reworked. Instead, pages will probably be sorted according to priority, 
and tackled in an ongoing process.

Q: The commission and member states were said to have "agreed to 
exchange information and benchmark their progress". What information 
are they planning to exchange and by whom will their progress be 
benchmarked?

A: Under the commission's Employment division, there is a group of 
senior officials appointed by the member states to follow-up the eEurope 
2002 Action Plan implementation in relation to e-Inclusion. This group - 
known as Employment and Social Dimension of the Information Society 
(ESDIS) – is charged with benchmarking and monitoring progress on 
this action plan, including the adoption by public sites of WAI 
guidelines.

The benchmarking will done at member state level and reported to this 
group. ESDIS is also advised by a group of experts on Internet 
accessibility called the eAccessibility Group, whose members were 
appointed by the member states. ESDIS will report regularly on their 
monitoring activities and highlight identified best practices from member 
states.

Q: Which organisations will be responsible for making Europa 
accessible?

A: The central responsibility for managing Europa resides with the 
commission's Press division, while most of the actual content is provided 
by staff throughout the commission. There is therefore a need to train a 
great number of webmasters, as well as control a significant number of 
contractors. The modernisation workplan will be executed with the help 
of several companies that supply specific pieces of technology; provide 
general design consultancy; manage specific pages and sections; and 
provide content to individual services.

Q: What will be done to encourage European and member state funded 
organisations to make their web sites accessible?

A: We encourage our projects which are receiving European 
Commission funds to adopt the WAI guidelines. We are also studying 
how encourage initiatives funded by the commission to adopt the 
guidelines. Present member states' different approaches and experiences 
will be reported at ESDIS group and best practices will be identified. We 
will then encourage member states to adopt these best practices.

NOTE: The European Commission eEurope web page will report 
progress on all eEurope Action Points:
http://europa.eu.int/information_society/eeurope/index_en.htm

[Section four ends.]


SECTION FIVE: INTERVIEW.
- ACCESSIBLE GAMES.

* BIOLOGICAL WARFARE.
By Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com

The time is the distant future, the location an impregnable, top-secret 
military research base deep inside a mountain on a remote island. A few 
hours ago all transmissions from the base suddenly ceased, at the very 
moment of activation of a classified biological experiment three years in 
the planning.

As a secret agent for the FDN – the Federation of Democratic Nations - 
you have been sent to investigate whether the experiment has horribly 
misfired. As you land your shuttle you have little idea of the mutated 
foes you will have to combat to access the heart of the base and shut 
down the experiment.

So runs the preamble to 'Shades of Doom' from GMA games 
(http://www.gmagames.com), hailed by enthusiasts as one of the best 
computer games so far created for blind and visually impaired players.

The game uses a sophisticated combination of spoken instructions and 
multi-layered sounds – up to 32 playing simultaneously - which indicate 
anything from how many monsters are in a room to wind direction or the 
humming of computer equipment. The game is 'self-voicing', so does 
not require a separate piece of screen-reader software.

Control of your actions is by joystick and by various keys which allow 
you to perform tasks such as access weapons or determine the state of 
your health. As you approach objects, be they doors or monsters, their 
position and nature is indicated by a beep which intensifies the closer 
you get. You find out what the object is by pressing a key.

"I think Shades of Doom is the best interactive game for visually 
impaired people so far because not only do you not have to rely on a 
screen reader but you can control whatever your character does. It's 
really addictive," says Maurice Press, director of the consultancy 
Disability Resource Team (http://www.disabilityresourceteam.co.uk) by 
day and a games enthusiast by night.

Blind since birth, Press has always loved computer games and is proud to 
have just completed Shades of Doom with 23,000 points – though not 
without "some difficulty, lack of sleep and not being spoken to by my 
wife".

Visually impaired people have in the past encountered serious difficulties 
with accessibility to gaming software. "The visually impaired 
community got very excited in the early days about the games on the 
market which would say on the screen, 'you are in a forest, standing near 
a tree. Turn left or right?' But then everyone else got things like 
Gameboy and we felt very much behind," he says.

"Since then people have been trying to make virtual reality games. I 
would say the first successful one for the visually impaired was Grizzly 
Gulch by Bavisoft (http://www.bavisoft.com) as it was the first time you 
didn't need a speech program and could just listen to everything through 
your speakers or headphones and interact with characters getting into gun 
fights or whatever".

With Shades of Doom – which is loosely based on the hugely popular 
'Doom' game for sighted people - the gaming experience is taken to new 
heights with a range of exotic monsters, from mutant dogs and humans to 
a "slimy thing" which is very tricky to kill – Press recommends that you 
"set a 10 second delay on a disrupter mine and run like hell."

There are red herrings and tricks in the game too, to catch you unaware. 
"On level two there is a security chip hidden in a toilet. To get it you 
need to flush the toilet and when you do so, the slimy monster will come 
out and kill you unless you're very fast." Other testing adversaries 
include "a mad scientist with a laugh like a chipmunk" who snatches 
your security chips unless you're very quick, and "I'm not going to tell 
you what's in the crate on level five, but you need to get away from that 
pretty quickly too."

Press regularly participates in gaming user groups, sharing playing tips 
with both sighted and visually impaired enthusiasts. He sees a good 
future ahead for his hobby: one game to watch out for next year will be a 
fighter plane flight-simulator which Press himself is helping develop for 
a company that he cannot yet name. Different keys will enable the player 
to find out and control plane speed and height, with other sounds and 
announcements warning of attacks and other events.

It should be released around February. In the meantime, perhaps games 
addicts who have finished Shades of Doom will be able to get a little 
sleep.

NOTE: For our past coverage of accessible gaming, see issues 5, 6 and 8.

[Section five ends.]

HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail eab-
subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can 
list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please 
encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin 
may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as long as they 
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is 
also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
