E-ACCESS BULLETIN.

The email newsletter on
technology issues for people
with visual impairment and blindness.
E-Access Bulletin web site:
<http://www.e-accessibility.com>

Sponsored by the Royal National Institute for the Blind
<http://www.rnib.org.uk>
the National Library for the Blind
<http://www.nlbuk.org>
and the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk>

Please forward this bulletin to friends or
colleagues so they can subscribe by 
emailing <mailto:eab-subs@headstar.com>
full details at the end of the bulletin.
The more subscribers we have,
the better our free service can become!

[Issue starts.]

ISSUE 21, SEPTEMBER 2001.

CONTENTS:

Section one: News:
Iconic images of US attacks described for blind.
UK copyright Bill supporters play for time –lobbying for a loophole.
Pentagon becomes centre of accessibility – advises 43 other US 
government departments.
Reef on lookout for access partners – multichannel software company 
seeks resellers.
Achromatopsy awareness campaign – an international appeal.
News in brief: DTI IS help; Book forager; Kasday tribute

Section two: Trials and tribulations. Access to pre-release versions of all 
kinds of computer software is vital to iron out access glitches, but 
without careful consideration it can backfire.

Section three: Speech wave breaks over europe. Europe's first voice-
controlled web portal likely to be followed in the months to come by a 
wave of similar services from across the Atlantic.

Section four: We have the power – but at a price. Reader responses to E-
Access Bulletin reader enquiry on voice recognition software.

[Contents ends.]


SECTION ONE - NEWS.

ICONIC IMAGES OF US ATTACKS DESCRIBED FOR BLIND.

Visually impaired people are able to keep informed of the latest news 
and implications of last week's US terrorist attacks by accessing a web 
service provided by the New York-based Visually Impaired Computer 
Users Group.

Many of the organisation's members worked in the towers, among them 
vice-president Vivian Yacu who was evacuated unhurt after the buildings 
were struck. The web site, at http://www.hicom.net/~oedipus/vicug 
provides accessible information about the location of hospitals and 
allows visitors to sign up to email alert service that updates them of 
travel problems.

The site also links to an archive of descriptions of television images 
associated with the attack. "Many of the indelible images from the 
attacks have been transformed into iconic images, about which we, the 
blind, are usually the last to learn," says webmaster Gregory Rosmaita.

"Imagine the cloud of smoke as a grey fish shaped like an oval reaching 
down from the top left corner and taking a bite out of the right hand 
tower two thirds of the way down," reads part of the description of the 
World Trade Centre cataclysm. For more visit:
http://wtc.crysm.net


COPYRIGHT BILL SUPPORTERS PLAY FOR TIME.

Supporters of a UK parliamentary private member's Bill to legalise the 
production of accessible versions of digital material on a non-profit basis 
will meet with government ministers on 26 September to secure the 
law's passage.

It is often necessary for blind and visually impaired people to create 
alternative versions of digital material to allow them to listen to them 
using screen readers (see also E-Access Bulletin August 2001). PDF 
documents produced by Adobe and eBooks formats are particularly 
prone to needing such manipulation.

Those supporting the Copyright (Visually Impaired Persons) Bill, as the 
draft legislation is know, are hoping it is sufficiently compatible with the 
government's plans to be given formal support. Failing that, supporters 
plan to find a 'backdoor' route into the legislative process with a first 
reading in the House of Lords, according to RNIB campaigns officer 
David Mann.

According to Mann the Bill, which was laid down by Labour MP Rachel 
Squire, "leaves the onus on authors or publishers to take people to task - 
and ultimately to court - if they thought a particular activity did conflict 
with their legitimate interests." Some fear government plans will be more 
cumbersome.

Melanie Johnson MP (http://www.welwyn-hatfield-labour.fsnet.co.uk ), 
parliamentary under-secretary of state for competition, consumers and 
markets at the Department of Trade and Industry, will represent the 
government at the meeting.

* Leading UK consumer book publisher Penguin Books 
(http://www.penguin.co.uk) last month announced plans to launch 
eBooks delivered in Adobe eBook and Microsoft reader format. Their 
level of accessibility has yet to be determined.


PENTAGON BECOMES CENTRE OF ACCESSIBILITY.

Forty-three US government agencies have received access equipment 
and advice from the Department of Defence's Computer/Electronic 
Accommodations Programme (CAP) over the last year.

Congress asked the unit to start dealing with requests for its assistive 
technology services from employees of government departments outside 
the Department of Defence in October 2000. At the same time the CAP's 
yearly budget was increased from 2.5 million US dollars to 4.5 million 
dollars to allow it to meet the extra costs.

Demand for CAP's services is expected to increase as government 
departments wake-up to Section 508, a law introduced in June requiring 
them to provide accessible information technologies to employees.

Meanwhile, to increase awareness of the obligations of Section 508, the 
US government Centre for Information Technology Accommodation has 
revamped its 508-awareness web site:
http://www.section508.gov


REEF ON LOOKOUT FOR PARTNERS.

The global Internet business software house Reef is looking for business 
partners specialising in accessibility, vice president Jack Berkowitz told 
E-Access Bulletin this week.

Reef (http://www.reef.com ) is hoping new international partners will be 
willing to resell Reef EveryWare, which can deliver Internet content 
differently depending on user preferences and methods of access.

The company's only existing partner in the access field is US-based 
consultancy and software supplier WebABLE 
(http://www.webable.com). Founder Mike Paciello said: "Reef's engine 
gives us a 'leg up' on the development curve that otherwise might have 
taken us much longer to produce."

Paciello said WebABLE is currently modifying its web site to act as a 
showcase for EveryWare before beginning work on two or three projects 
employing the software.


ACHROMATOPSY AWARENESS CAMPAIGN.

Two of our readers from Italy, Elisabetta and Gianni Luchetta, are 
creating a support network for people with the rare congenital disease 
achromatopsy and would like to raise awareness of its work ahead of a 
planned world convention on the condition.

The disease affects just one in 33,000 people and is therefore largely 
unknown and often misdiagnosed by many optometrists. Life for 
sufferers – who include the Luchettas' own young son Lorenzo - can be 
very hard, with sunlight-blindness and greatly impaired eyesight.

The Association of Italian Achromatics is interested in talking to anyone 
affected by this disease so it can record and understand their needs and 
help them.

To find out more, including a moving personal account of Lorenzo's 
experiences, see the Luchettas' contribution to the European 
Parliament's temporary committee on human genetics in Italian and 
English at:
http://www.europarl.eu.int/comparl/tempcom/genetics/contributions/cont
ri_acromati.pdf
This is a pdf document – for a plain text version or to simply make 
contact email:
giluche@tin.it


NEWS IN BRIEF:

DTI IS HELP: The Department of Trade and Industry's 'UKISHELP' 
web site promoting UK participation in European Commission 
Information Society programmes has unveiled a new frames-free and 
graphics-free version:
http://www.ukishelp.co.uk

DIABETES QUERY: A bulletin reader writes to ask any blind and 
diabetic people who use a speaking blood sugar monitor, or 
'glucometer', if they are effective and worth the current retail price of 
500 UK pounds. Please email dan@headstar.com with your experiences 
or advice.

BOOK FORAGER: The National Library for the Blind 
(http://www.nlbuk.org ) is to launch in December a library search system 
called 'Book Forager', which is designed to make suggestions about 
which books are most appropriate for each reader. A test version is at:
http://www.forager.co.uk/nlb

KASDAY TRIBUTE: In our last issue we mentioned the granting of a 
special award to Dr Leonard Kasday of the Institute on Disabilities at 
Temple University, Philadelphia by the International Coalition of Access 
Engineers and Specialists (ICAES). Dr Kasday sadly passed away earlier 
this year, and a tribute to him from Michael Burks of the International 
Centre of Disability Resources on the Internet can be found at:
http://www.icdri.org/passing_of_len_kasday.htm

[Section One ends.]


SECTION TWO: ANALYSIS
- BETA TESTING.

TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS.
Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com

Giving visually impaired computer users access to pre-release versions 
of all kinds of computer software is a vital step to help developers iron 
out minor access glitches at the last minute.

Last month online service provider AOL became one of the first of the 
major technology companies to seek out visually impaired beta testers. 
AOL hopes these testers will offer last minute suggestions to make its 
new software accessible enough to gain the approval of the US National 
Federation of the Blind (http://www.nfb.org) by November. If it fails to 
come up to scratch by then, the NFB has pledged it will restart a legal 
case against AOL suspended last November.

Despite having accepted the need for accessibility the company has 
found to its dismay that many in the Internet access community remain 
deeply antagonistic. Embarrassingly, this antagonism surfaced when a 
widely-circulated open invitation to beta test its new software was 
greeted with derision by some members of international email discussion 
lists dedicated to computer access issues.

Of particular concern to many was that AOL seemed to be requiring 
testers to join the AOL service, filling out membership forms and 
submitting credit card numbers. Some wondered why this information 
was needed when the testing period was said to be free.

Internet access campaigner Katie Haritos-Shea says AOL's registration 
arrangement was indicative of the corporation's ignorance of the fact that 
70% of disabled people in the US are out of work and so are unlikely to 
have credit card numbers. According to Haritos-Shea the company will 
only gain the respect of the disabled community by employing disabled 
people in its accessibility unit. "It is a real job," she says.

Internet access consultant David Poehlman's comments echoed these 
sentiments, saying it is important companies do not use the beta testing 
process to answer questions that should have been dealt with by 
employees of the company. "Accessibility testing should only be a sort 
of bug catcher rather than an answer to the question, 'Is this software 
accessible?' That question should have already have been internally 
answered through proper development processes and testing."

Poehlman also says that, "Beta testing should be available to be 
performed independently of the service for which the software is being 
tested." In the case of AOL, he said, this would mean testers should be 
able to test the software without having to sign up to the service. But 
Poehlman also indicated that the public furore surrounding the AOL beta 
test could have been avoided, saying: "It is important that beta testers be 
gathered quietly and that they sign non-disclosure agreements."

Curtis Chong, technology director at the NFB, says it is important for 
software companies to realise that it is sometimes too early to do 
accessibility beta testing. According to Chong, Microsoft had asked him 
several years ago whether the NFB would be interested in testing future 
versions of the Windows operating system for accessibility." I told 
Microsoft that we were not interested," Chong said, "primarily because 
there was no screen access technology that would be compatible with 
these versions."

It is often the case that mainstream beta testers for non-access aspects of 
major software products choose to test the software in their spare time 
simply because they are dependent on the products in their lives and 
want to see them become more appropriate to their needs.

The danger is that by failing to build in accessibility in the past, many 
people with disabilities have long ago been forced to find alternatives to 
mainstream software packages and therefore have little interest in testing 
new versions for accessiblity. For this to change, software companies 
will have to prove that from now on they will consistently view 
accessibility as more than just an afterthought.

* In our next issue: AOL Accessibility Director Debbie Fletter responds.

[Section two ends.]


SECTION THREE: TECHNOLOGY
- VOICE PORTALS.

SPEECH WAVE BREAKS OVER EUROPE.
Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com

The launch last month of Europe's first comprehensive voice-controlled 
web portal, 'eckoh' (http://www.eckoh.com - see E-Access Bulletin, 
August 2001), is likely to be followed in the months to come by a wave 
of other similar services from across the Atlantic, where they are already 
well underway.

There are a number of organisations already very active in targeting the 
US corporate market including BeVocal (http://www.bevocal.com), Tell 
Me (http://www.tellme.com ), HeyAnita (http://www.heyanita.com) and 
OnStar (http://www.onstar.com) which has launched a full in-car voice 
portal service providing voice dialling services and voice-activated 
Internet access.

"I suspect Europe as a whole is at least 18 months behind the US in this 
field," says Bob McDowall, business and technology consultant to Bloor 
Research. "However, the gap will be probably be narrowed by US 
companies introducing their services more quickly into Europe. 
Mediterranean Europe would appear to provide the most high-level 
growth in the short to medium term because of the aversion to mouse and 
keyboard by so many in the corporate world there."

Voice recognition technology in general has improved substantially over 
the past two to three years, he says. The main challenges faced now 
relate to the way information accessible by voice is organised.

"Selection can be made quickly and easily on a text screen, but voice 
portals have still to find an optimal way of enabling users to move 
rapidly through a menu or move rapidly from one section to another."

The technologies are not universally applicable, he says, but lend 
themselves particularly to use in accessing short, precise pieces of 
information in response to enquiries. "The information is likely to be for 
immediate use or application, and will be of a non-analytical or reflective 
nature. I would suggest that such information will gain little or nothing 
from being personalised."

In the US, one of the strongest leaders of such services is AOL, with its 
AOLbyPhone offering 
(http://www.aol.com/anywhere/aolbyphone_non.adp ) for accessing e-
mail, weather, finances and other services. The service recently won an 
editor's choice award from the US-based Speech Technology magazine 
(http://www.speechtechmag.com), although as yet there are no public 
plans to bring the service to Europe.

The other major area of voice-controlled services for mainstream use is 
in accessing the ever-expanding range of sophistated services offered by 
mobile phones and other portable communications devices, such as text 
messaging and address book management.

There are also voice-activated services to enable people to interact with 
their mobile devices such as Wildfire (http://www.wildfire.com), which 
has been available for some time in both the US and Europe.

In the UK, mobile phone operator Orange has approximately 40,000 
customers using the service, with its most popular features being voice-
activated dialling and voice-enabled voice messaging.

In an interesting cross-fertilisation of phone and Internet, planned 
developments for Wildfire include the ability to interact with the same 
services by voice or web and email as preferred.

"Voice is a good medium for access but not always appropriate," says 
Mike Hartnett, director of business planning at Wildfire. "For instance, if 
I have a calendar service I am likely to want to create the bulk of the 
initial information through a web-based interface because that type of 
detail is more easily input that way. However, when I am mobile or 
remote from web access and receive a reminder regarding a certain event 
via voice, I should be able to acknowledge or perhaps change that 
particular calendar entry via voice.

"The work going on now is to work through scenarios to provide the 
most flexible and appropriate access for a given user at a given time."

Other developments planned include greater automatic 'intelligent 
customisation'. For instance when you first start working with Wildfire it 
helps you to learn and use the services. As you become accustomed to 
them the early help prompts are weaned away to enable greater speed 
and efficiency.

And in a move which will bring the service directly into competition 
with the 'voice portal' providers, wildfire is also working on an 
extension to enable full voice-activated web access which should be 
available through Orange by the end of 2002.

Another voice service for mobile devices that has been designed with the 
visual impairment community expressly in mind is TALX 
(http://www.talx.de/index_e.htm), a software package which enables 
users to access all the advanced functions of Nokia communicators such 
as text messaging and Internet access using voice commands.

The company is German but TALX co-founder Torsten Brand, who is 
himself blind, says an English version is now fully functional. The 
company has found distributors in Germany, Italy, Sweden and Belgium 
though it is still looking for a UK partner for distribution and translation 
of the full user manual. Brand says TALX hopes to release a new version 
for the Nokia Communicator 9210 in the second quarter of 2002.

And so, as Europe catches up with the US in this cutting edge field, the 
future looks bright for voice access to the Internet and personal 
communications. "In principle it should be much easier to access the 
Internet by voice than mouse, keyboard and computer screen," says Bob 
McDowall. "It also opens the internet up geographically and 
demographically to a much wider range of people." This expansion will 
certainly include greater ease of access for the blind and visually 
impaired community.

[Section three ends.]


SECTION FOUR: READER RESPONSE
- SOFTWARE REVIEWS.

WE HAVE THE POWER – BUT AT A PRICE.

There has been a strong response from readers to last issue's request 
from Gill Burrington of Burrington Partnership for advice on the voice 
recognition software offering text-to-speech, dictation, and Internet 
navigation "that work well together and are not outrageously expensive".

Pete Gurney wrote in to say: "there is a premium version of the free 
accessible office software suite 'EasyOffice' that costs just under 40 US 
dollars from e-press (http://www.e-press.com).

"Both the free and premium editions allow you to control your machine 
via voice and browse the web. But the premium edition includes two 
versions of 'Easy Voice Recognition', one for slower machines and the 
other with continuous dictation which needs at least a 600 megahertz 
machine. It also includes an easy web creation program, and a barcode 
program. Within a few weeks Dixons in the UK will apparently be 
selling the premium package."

Most other correspondents recommended Dragon Systems' 
NaturallySpeaking (http://www.dragonsys.com). Pratik Patel, Project 
Manager, CUNY Assistive Technology Services, said: "What your 
reader appears to want is a system like we see in Star Trek. A fully-
functional voice recognition system like that is on its way; but [in] five to 
10 years.

"While NaturallySpeaking from Dragon currently offers the best 
performance, due to the need to integrate the technology with other 
programs it is difficult to achieve perfect results.

"NaturallySpeaking, IBM's voice recognition software ViaVoice 
(http://www-4.ibm.com/software/speech), or Voice XPress from Lernout 
& Hauspie (http://www.lhsl.com/voicexpress) rely heavily on the 
Microsoft Active Accessibility modules to provide them with the proper 
information in various programs. Despite Microsoft's claims, Active 
Accessibility is not readily used by programmers when programs come 
out.

"Moreover, there is no feature in any of the three voice recognition 
software mentioned above that allows one to read every feature of the 
operating systems such as dialogue boxes. To do that, one has to obtain 
JAWS for Windows from Henter-Joyce 
(http://www.hj.com/JAWS/JAWS.html ), plus an additional program 
called 'JawBone' from a third company, Next Generation Technologies 
(http://www.ngtvoice.com/software/jawbone). JawBone acts as an 
interface betwen JAWS and NaturallySpeaking Professional Version.

"The cost of all three combined runs to around 2,100 US dollars. As if 
this weren't bad enough, Gill will have to increase her system RAM up 
to at least 256 MB.

"One of the best things NaturallySpeaking allows is improved speech 
recognition accuracy. With the proper training it is possible to achieve 
96-98 per cent accuracy. This also comes at a cost, however. At least 20 
hours' of training is needed with a trainer who can show the nuances of 
the software, and I would recommend that users train at least 40 hours 
more to perfect these skills."

Other Dragon enthusiasts included Sam Howie, who suggested Gill 
experiments first with a demonstration copy, and Bill Klein of SoVerNet 
in Vermont (http://www.sover.net), who said: "I am the president of a 
fast-growing international corporation. My position requires the use of, 
many widely diversified programs and a great deal of 'dictation' to MS 
Excel, Word and Outlook Express, to name just a few.

"I'm blind. I've been using Dragon for five years and would be lost 
without it. In conjunction with my screen reader, I can do almost 
anything I want. I found that the limitations of Dragon are user-
dependent - the more you train it, the better it, and you, become. It has 
numerous navigation features such as file opening and closing 
commands and will work as fast as you require, or speak.

"Much of my correspondence requires technical language and scientific 
terminology, and occasionally, Dragon doesn't recognise a word. One 
spells the word, says it and it's in the system. I've never required any 
support."

Rick Williams added to the general buzz for Dragon: "I use 
NaturallySpeaking Professional linked with JAWS via JawBone. The 
package can take very fast dictation and read back well. It can also 
dictate direct into Word and, Outlook Express (not so good as it is 
designed to work with Outlook), and is readily customised.

"There are a number of companies who can supply and train people in 
using this package, including bdf solutions (http://www.bdf-
solutions.co.uk )."

Gill Burrington was delighted with this wide-ranging and valuable set of 
responses. She said: "Two particular things have become apparent. First, 
there seems to be no inexpensive solution. Second, the restricted choice.

"Having been at at a conference in Washington recently, I have gained 
some further useful information. The first new (to me) software I 
discovered was ZoomText (http://www.aisquared.com) which costs 
around 450 US dollars (430 pounds in the UK), which offers an 
integrated screen magnifier and screen reader.

"I came home clutching my demo copy and tried to run the programme 
but my system froze. Their helpful helpdesk diagnosed that the reason 
for this is that I have not got an accelerated graphics card.

"Also new to me was Arkenstone's OPENBook, costing 675 pounds 
(http://www.arkenstone.org/main.html ). This allows voice synthesis and 
Braille output from a scanner, so would be useful for reading journal 
articles, or indeed the bills which arrive through the post with such 
depressing frequency! However, the helpful information on Arkenstone's 
site showed me my four-year-old scanner isn't adequate.

"Taking everything into account, I am giving serious attention to 
upgrading everything. I should go for the highest specification I can 
afford, but the total cost is depressing.

"Whatever my final decision, I am hugely grateful to everyone who took 
the time to respond to my call for help. I know I could have spoken to an 
advisor in one of the organisations specialising in helping visually 
impaired people, but knowing what real users of these solutions feel 
about them will be a tremendous help."

[Section four ends.]


HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, e-mail eab-
subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header. You can 
list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the message. Please 
encourage all your colleagues to sign up!

To unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com

Copyright 2001 Headstar Ltd. http://www.headstar.com The Bulletin 
may be reproduced in full as long as all parts including this copyright 
notice are included. Sections of the report may be quoted as long as they 
are clearly sourced as 'taken from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email 
newsletter', and our web site address http://www.e-accessibility.com is 
also cited.

PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek  dan@headstar.com
Deputy Editor - Phil Cain  phil@headstar.com
Reporter - Tamara Fletcher  tamara@headstar.com
Editorial Advisor - Kevin Carey  humanity@atlas.co.uk 

[Issue ends.]
