+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 54, JUNE 2004.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk/).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten .


++ISSUE 54 CONTENTS.

01: Europe launches major access programme
- Research project paves way for international guidelines.

02: Banks named and shamed over card problems
- Failures to explain 'Chip and PIN' alternative.

03: Guidelines for local government chiefs
- Managers, policymakers and designers targeted.

04: Council trio claim 'AAA' rating
- Expert praises effort but questions detail.

News in Brief: 05: Inclusion focus - Hong Kong conference; 06:
Additions revealed - publisher database; 07: Arabian rights - UN-
backed forum.

Section two: 'The inbox' - Readers' forum.
08: Validator problem - HTML struggle; 09: Radio objections - article
feedback; 10: Training contacts - CDs sought; 11: Bridge request -
accessible game.

Section three: Focus - discussion lists.
12: Chain reaction: 'Self-help' collaborative email lists where access
technology users swap tips and advice can also help manufacturers
improve their products. Mel Poluck reports.

Section four: Analysis - web accessibility.
13: The hard road to progress: The recent Disability Rights
Commission investigation into web accessibility made depressing
reading, but Julie Hill finds that public and private sector pioneers are
now making good headway.

[Contents ends].


++SPECIAL NOTICE: Sight Village 2004
- 13-15 July, Birmingham, UK.

Around 3,000 people are expected to visit this year's QAC Sight
Village, the exhibition for everyone with an interest in technology and
services connected to visual impairment. Exhibitors and visitors come
from throughout the UK, America, Canada, Europe, the Middle East
and Africa. Smaller organisations of or for people with visual
impairment are particularly welcomed as exhibitors alongside the 'big
players'.

This year the event has moved to a larger venue: the Clarendon Suites,
a conference centre near to the exhibition's host Queen Alexandra
College. All areas of the venue are accessible for wheelchairs, and
admission is free. See:
http://www.qac.ac.uk/sightvillage/6-1.html .

[Special notice ends].


++SECTION ONE: NEWS.

+01: EUROPE LAUNCHES MAJOR ACCESS PROGRAMME.

The European Commission has launched a major new programme of
research into accessibility policies across EU member states, paving
the way for a set of accessibility guidelines to improve access to digital
services and technologies for disabled users across the continent.

The eInclusion@eu project (http://www.einclusion-eu.org/) will
examine national and regional policies on access to employment,
public sector technology procurement, and access to online public
services such as e-government, e-health and e-learning. As part of its
work the 30-month project aims to build an EU-wide picture of
accessibility requirements for government web sites, including which
accessibility standards are used, if compliance is voluntary or
mandatory, and whether feedback from users is collected and acted on.

Lutz Kubitschke of German consultancy Empirica
(http://www.empirica.com/), which is co-ordinating the research, told
E-Access Bulletin: "It is important to get a structured view of what is
going on out there. It's no good if guidelines are issued in Brussels, but
they are not practical for member states to implement." It is hoped that
by the end of the year, the Commission will use the research to issue
draft guidelines on public procurement, Kubitschke said.

The findings should also uncover valuable information such as
problems with implementing international web accessibility standards.
"In some cases it may be that the expertise needed to translate
guidelines such as WAI (http://www.w3.org/WAI) into procedures is
missing, or that not enough money, time and resources are made
available for accessible web design," said Kubitschke. The
eInclusion@eu project is being driven by a core of research teams in
eight member states, and is funded through the EU's 17.5 billion euro
Sixth Framework research programme
(http://fp6.cordis.lu/fp6/home.cfm).


+02: BANKS NAMED AND SHAMED OVER CARD PROBLEMS.

UK banks who fared poorly in a 'mystery shopping' exercise to test the
accessibility of new-style credit and debit cards are to be "named and
shamed" by the RNIB.

The cards tested use a new so-called 'Chip and PIN' system designed
to combat fraud by requiring users to key in a security PIN number
whenever a purchase is made. Banks are supposed to offer and explain
an alternative to Chip and PIN called 'Chip and signature', which is
easier for some people with impaired vision since they may find
keypads hard to use. However, the survey found that many were not
doing so.

Results of the mystery shopping experiment will be published towards
the end of August and will include full details of which card issuers
were contacted along with a breakdown of the results.

When a pool of vision-impaired 'mystery shoppers'
(http://www.rnib.org.uk/xpedio/groups/public/documents/publicwebsit
e/public_mysteryshopping.hcsp) initially contacted the call centres of
fifteen banks, building societies and credit card companies to ask for
advice on the accessible alternative, just 22 callers out of the total 67
calls made (33 per cent) were told about the alternative and 15 call
centre employees (22 per cent) mentioned that customers could
continue to sign but either gave incorrect information about the chip
and signature card or knew nothing about it.

The RNIB campaigns team is currently working with banks to improve
services, for example leading staff through practical issues such as how
call centre staff can identify when to issue a chip and signature card.
The RNIB has also suggested banks improve information on their
intranets and external information on their web sites. "Internal
communication is the issue," says Helen Dearman, campaigns officer
at RNIB. Dearman says she has already noticed a reduction in the
amount of calls to the RNIB from people complaining about their
banks over this issue, although she adds that a high staff turnover in
bank call centres is likely to hamper progress when the mystery
shopper exercise is repeated in August


+03: GUIDELINES FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT CHIEFS.

The RNIB has published guidelines for senior managers and policy-
makers in local government on how to make new technologies, from
smart cards to tactile displays, more usable by people with disabilities.

Written by Dr John Gill, chief scientist at the RNIB, the 'Access-
Ability' booklet (http://www.tiresias.org/guidelines/access-ability/)
provides an overview of design considerations to be taken into account
when developing new services. From transport and financial
transactions to telecommunications and computing, the publication
outlines common problems experienced by the elderly and disabled
and offers suggestions for addressing them.

"The booklet is targeted at senior managers who aren't specialists in
technology and don't have in-depth knowledge of disability," says Gill.
The guidelines were produced as part of the RNIB's collaboration with
the National Smartcard Project
(http://www.nationalsmartcardproject.org.uk/), one of 22 national
projects commissioned by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister to
aid local authorities on the road to e-government
(http://fastlink.headstar.com/nat1).

The collaboration identified three target audiences who needed more
information about accessibility: senior managers and policy-makers in
local government; project leaders responsible for implementing local e-
government projects; and hardware and software designers who may or
may not work for local government.

The guidelines were developed in collaboration with Comité Européen
de Normalisation (CEN - http://www.cenorm.be/), the European
technology standards body.

++4:...

OK [Agrave;	192], replace accent at end of line, À

ÿ, Replace accent at start of line, [yuml;  255] OK.

TENS error [lt;  60] (not allowed in HTML/XML), <.

TENS error [euro;  8364], item costs € 10.

TENS error [pound;	 163], item costs £ 10.




++END NOTES.

+HOW TO RECEIVE THIS BULLETIN.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2004 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com/ .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the report may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+PERSONNEL:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
News reporter - Julie Hill
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]

