+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 76, APRIL 2006.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by RNIB ( http://www.rnib.org.uk ).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 76 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: MyGuide Portal Prepared For Launch
- new phase for government's web inclusion plan.

02: Free IT Skills Training Launches Across The UK
- EyeT4All Goes Live.

03: Art Gallery Wins Major Web Accessibility Award
- Tate Modern's i-Map comes up trumps.

04: Inaccessibility Will Create 'Second Class Citizens,' Says MP
- Ann Widdecombe launches IT training scheme.

News in Brief: 05: Windows Explained - software guides; 06:
Feedback Request - views on digital book samples; 07: Digital Europe
- inclusion policy meeting.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Vacancy Feedback - assistive technology job sources; 09: Radio
Wave - more on accessible two-way radios; 10: Price Slash - assistive
technology costs; 11: Web Wise - guidelines for Lithuanian request;
12: Size Settings - taming Internet Explorer.

Section Three: Opinion - Accessible Gaming
13: Adventures In Endless Soundscapes: Founder of US-based BSC
Games Justin Daubenmire looks at the challenges for small accessible
games companies and hints at future developments.

Section Four: Focus - IT Procurement
14: How To Buy Software And Not Break The Law: Six years ago a
consortium of councils set out to work with the creators of a leading
piece of software to make it more accessible, and now they have
succeeded. Ruth Loebl reports on how they managed it, and the lessons
learned.

[Contents ends].


++Sponsored Notice: QAC Sight Village 2005
- Birmingham, UK
- 18-20 July 2006

The latest in cutting edge technology for people who are blind or
partially sighted will be on show this July at Sight Village at Queen
Alexandra College in Birmingham.

Now in its thirteenth year, the event includes presentations covering
tactile graphics and employment as well as panel discussions and high
quality displays from companies and organisations from around the
world and from all over the UK. Sighted guides and tactile maps will
be available for delegates.

Registration for this major international exhibition is free. For details
and to register go to:
http://www.viewplus.com/sightvillage-registration/

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: MyGuide Portal Prepared For Launch

Tests have begun on MyGuide, a new portal that helps people with
little experience of the internet start to use email, search for
information and browse web sites. The six month tests will gather
feedback from user groups likely to be "digitally excluded", such as
vision impaired people and the elderly.

MyGuide is being tested in Leicester, Blackburn, Gloucester, Kings
Lynn and Wisbech, Southwark and Lambeth with the aim of tackling
any remaining design flaws, and gaining valuable feedback about how
useful the service is. The trials are being run by University for Industry
(UfI - http://www.ufi.com/home/default.asp ),
the body responsible for delivering the Learndirect service and running
the 6,000 UK online centres. Depending on the response, MyGuide
could be given a full launch, backed by a government publicity
campaign later this year.

Development work on MyGuide, which has a key role in the
government's digital inclusion strategy, is supported by 22.5 million
pounds from the Capital Modernisation Fund and co-ordinated by the
Department for Education and Skills (DfES), originally under the
project name 'Cybrarian'.

According to DfES research, about 16 million of the 40 million adults
in the UK could benefit from the service, including people with
physical or cognitive disabilities, older people, those with specific
cultural needs, those with low basic skills, and those who do not yet
see the benefit of the internet for them.

MyGuide is designed to be used at home as well as in public libraries
and community centres. Market research by Ofcom suggests that many
people, especially the elderly, prefer to learn media skills from family
and friends or by themselves, rather than in formal groups
http://www.ofcom.org.uk/advice/media_literacy/medlitpub/medlitpubr
ss/medialit_audit/.
A range of stakeholder organisations are contributing to the project,
including Age Concern, the Disabled Living Foundation, RNIB and
RNID.


+02: Free IT Skills Training Launches Across The UK

A free training scheme aiming to broaden access to computers for
vision impaired people went live across England and Northern Ireland
this month.

The initiative introduces vision impaired people to computers who
have little or no experience of technology and will focus on teaching
those not currently employed or studying and those who have become
blind later in life.

Training sessions will see qualified British Computer Association of
the Blind
(BCAB - http://www.bcab.org.uk/ ),
tutors teaching basic everyday computer-based tasks to local vision
impaired people, such as how to write a letter on a computer, send and
receive email, listen to internet radio stations and scan and magnify
printed materials. The one-day sessions, the first of which took place at
Kent County Council, will be conducted in conjunction with local
blindness societies across the country.

Students will learn on computers installed with accessible software
packages: the voice recognition software 'Freedom box,' used for
accessing email and the internet from US company Serotek
Corporation
( http://www.freedombox.info/about.html )
and 'Guide'
(
http://www.softwareexpress.co.uk/read_more_about_Guide.asp?P=GB
P  ),
a magnifier and screen reader from UK company Software Express.

The scheme currently has funding for 30 more training sessions and
has been funded overall by 26,000 pounds raised solely by sales of
CDs of poetry read by celebrities, written by folk poet Les Barker.

The launch of 'EyeT4All,' by BCAB was described by BCAB Chair
Dr Mike Townsend as "a special day" for blind people in the UK.


+03: Art Gallery Wins Major Web Accessibility Award

Online service i-Map, provided by the Tate Modern art gallery, has
scooped the Jodi Award, the annual prize awarded to web sites that
make museums, libraries and galleries accessible to vision-impaired
people.

According to the judges, the service is one of the few to provide
comprehensive audio descriptions of exhibits, and is destined to set the
standard in global best practice, they said. The Tate's i-Map enables
vision impaired people to engage with exhibits using animation, audio
and raised image technology.

The Jodi Award for excellence with low budgets was awarded to
Speaking Volumes, a community web site enabling vision impaired
visitors to share opinions about audio books and set up reading circles
from Wakefield Library
( http://www.24hourmuseum.org.uk/nwh_gfx_en/ART36038.html ).

The shortlist included the Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery web
site 'Finds,' for amateur archaeologists run by the British Museum.
Also shortlisted were Their Reading Futures, an online resource for
library staff who work with young people and The History of
Wolverhampton, a web site developed by Wolverhampton Arts and
Museums Service with input from disabled users.

Selection for the shortlist was by a combination of automated testing
and user reports. The winner was chosen by a panel that included Nina
Baptiste of the Yorkshire Museums, Libraries and Archives Council,
Ross Parry of the Department of Museum Studies, University of
Leicester, Jon Pratty from the 24 Hour Museum,  and Marcus Weisen,
an accessibility consultant for the Museums, Libraries and Archives
Council.

Designers of web sites must think beyond accessibility standards such
as those laid down in the Web Accessibility Initiative
(WAI - http://www.w3.org/WAI/ ),
according to one of the judges, Jon Pratty of the 24 Hour Museum.
"It's important to get the message across that flare and creativity are
also important in making a web site accessible and engaging," he told
E-Access Bulletin.


+04: Inaccessibility Will Create 'Second Class Citizens,' Says MP.

Lack of access to computers by people with a disability will breed a
class of "new poor," Member of Parliament Ann Widdecombe
( http://www.annwiddecombemp.com/ )
said at the launch of an initiative aimed to encourage vision impaired
people to use computers.

The MP for Maidstone and the Weald in Kent told the audience at the
launch event of the national UK computer training skills initiative
'EyeT4All' last week "You can become - by not having access to
technology - second class citizens."

According to British Computer Association of the Blind
(BCAB - http://www.bcab.org.uk/ ),
just 31 per cent of vision impaired people have access to a computer,
compared with 58 per cent of sighted people.

The event was hosted by Kent County Council, who held the first ever
training day as part of the scheme. EyeT4All aims for vision impaired
people with little or no experience of computers to learn everyday
computer skills such as using email, internet, writing letters and
accessing online audio content.


++News in Brief:

+05: Windows Explained: An online guide designed to help people
using magnifiers or Jaws screen readers to access Windows XP has
been released by Henshaws society for blind people. The guides give
step-by-step instructions on using email, documents and browsing the
web, and are based on computer classes run at Chorlton Workshop in
Manchester:
http://vip.chowo.co.uk/

+06: Feedback Request: Webwords, a library service run by the Royal
Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead that enables vision-impaired
users to hear audio samples of talking books is asking for feedback
from users. The audio samples, designed to make choosing a book
easier, are accessed by hyperlinks in the borough's online library
catalogues:
http://www.webwords.org/index.php

+07: Digital Europe: The European Commission is holding a public
meeting in Brussels on 25 April to help shape its future policy on
digital inclusion, an important theme in the Commission's i2010
Information Society initiative for jobs and growth. Contributions can
address a broad range of topics, including good practice promotion,
research and regulatory work. More details on how to become involved
are available at:
http://europa.eu.int/information_society/policy/accessibility/eincl/polic
y/2006-04ws/index_en.htm


[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proofread before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Vacancy Feedback: In response to a query in the February issue
on assistive technology job vacancy sources, several readers have
contributed ideas: Margaret Hill from the UK government's
Department for Work and Pensions Accessibility Solutions Team and
Aidan Parr, a researcher at London-based Foundation for Assistive
Technology (FAST) both write to suggest FAST's online database of
assistive technology jobs found at:
http://www.fastuk.org/list_of_all_ATJobs.php .
Aidan adds: "There's also the Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive
Technology Society of North America (RESNA). See:
http://careers.resna.org/ ."

Rachel Rosenbaum in the US writes: "Most people look for jobs
through the Association for Education and Rehabilitation of the Blind
and Visually Impaired (AERVI) in Virginia, US (phone number 877-
492-2708 or 703-671-4500) or through the Association of Agency
Directors' National Council of Private Agencies serving Blind and
Visually Impaired Persons (NCPABVI -
http://www.ncpabvi.org/ )
in Missouri. The contact is Roxann Mayros, the Chief Executive. Her
e-mail is roxannmayros@agenciesfortheblind.org .

[further responses to inbox@headstar.com].

+09: Radio Wave: Terry Robinson, owner of Scotland-based online
navigation service Describe Online, writes in response to Giovanni
Urso's comments on two-way radio accessibility (E-Access Bulletin,
February 2006): "Most modern amateur radio transceivers are
equipped with a computer interface which allows them to be controlled
remotely via a home computer or similar device, although you still
need to buy extra parts to enable this.

"I'm sure things have moved on and transceivers can be plugged into
computers without any of this messing about. The more recent models,
including the Kenwood TS870 are supplied with their own software
which simulates a transceiver on your computer but I'm not sure how
accessible these programs are.

"You could acquire a self-tuning amplifier, thereby bypassing further
potential accessibility problems.

"We can bypass many accessibility limitations of transceiver interfaces
by controlling them remotely via an accessible home computer or
similar device. I use an old DOS computer which can produce
synthetic speech and Braille output. I prefer to use the Braille as I don't
want a synthesiser talking away while trying to read a remote station.

"We can obtain usable, if not terribly accessible automatic tuning units
to adjust aerials and can monitor the results through audio power or
voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR) meters. We can also get self-
tuning amplifiers. I have a rotator which has a tactile knob, so I can
even set my own beam headings. Again, this can be done via software,
according to the callsign or locator of the remote station.

"I suggest others on the 'blind-hams' mailing list would know more.
To join send a blank email to:
blind-hams-subscribe-request@listserv.icors.org"
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com]

+10: Price Slash: Roger Wilson-Hinds, director of UK-based Choice
Technology
( www.screenreader.co.uk )
writes in response to Fay Rohrlach who, in the last issue, wrote on the
high cost of assistive technology: "I am blind and have worked for
several years on low-cost technology. It's not easy because selling at
low cost fails to bring in money for marketing our products.

"However, we have taken the bull by the horns. In July, we shall
launch a free screen reader which will give excellent access to
Microsoft Word, email, the internet and others within the Windows
Operating system. It will be free to home users and we anticipate
organisations will pay for the use of the screen reader. Our enterprise
must be financially sustainable. We view what we are doing as an
opportunity to ensure computer literacy is [acquired by] blind people
regardless of financial circumstances."
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com].

+11: Web Wise: Dr Mark Magennis, Director of the Centre for
Inclusive Technology of the National Council for the Blind of Ireland
( www.cfit.ie )
writes to respond to Dalia Zamuiskaite from Lithuania who last issue
requested guidance on web accessibility standards.

Mark writes: "The international standard for website accessibility is the
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) from the Web
Accessibility Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium
(www.w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT/).
These are a little difficult to read and understand, so the
Irish National Disability Authority (NDA) has produced a resource
with a simpler structure and clearer explanations of WCAG
( http://accessit.nda.ie/technologyindex_1.html ). "For application
software, the NDA provides a good set of functional guidelines
( http://accessit.nda.ie/technologyindex_4.html ).

"These guidelines cover design for all users, taking into account all
disabilities. Guidelines specific to vision impairment may exist but it is
not good practice to design for a specific impairment. This is itself
discriminatory. It promotes the incorrect view that accessibility is
about design for specific disabilities rather than design for diversity
and leads to fragmentation of the disability community, dilution of
power and internal divisions that ultimately work against all people
with disabilities."
[further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].

+12: Size Settings: Geoff Adams-Spink, Age and Disability
Correspondent at BBC Online writes: "I'm using Internet Explorer (IE)
version 6.0.2900.2180.xpsp.040806-1825. It seems unable to
remember the text size setting so that I'm constantly having to reset it
to 'largest'.  This is irritating and utterly pointless: does anyone know
how to get around this?"
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com]


[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


Section Three - Opinion
- Accessible Gaming

+11: Adventures In Endless Soundscapes
by Justin Daubenmire

I founded BSC Games in 2002 to create accessible computer games for
the blind or visually impaired. I enjoy it tremendously. It is my deep
respect and identification with the blind community that encourages
me to bring audio games to them.

I oversee the work of the company's dedicated programmers, sound
engineers, content writers, musicians, sales support, technical support,
technical writers, marketers, and beta testers, all of whom are blind or
visually impaired.

At BSC Games we create exactly the types of games sighted gaming
enthusiasts play, with one exception: there are no graphics, which
forces us to be more creative with audio imagery and interactive
devices such as game pads or joysticks. We have sounds at our
fingertips to paint the scenes of the games in the mind of the blind
gamer.

Although we create audio games for the blind, there are sighted gamers
who play our games, who enjoy the challenge of an audio game since it
tests their skills in new ways that graphical games cannot. One of those
sighted gamers is Anne Walker who plays our Pipe2 Blast Chamber
game
( http://www.bscgames.com/pipe2.asp ),
a game in which players assume the role of an undercover agent whose
mission is to prevent the San Diego Mafia from blowing up the city.
"Playing games in the non-visual realm makes it more interesting to
figure out what it is you are supposed to be doing!" Walker says.
"Rather than just looking around and going for it, with these games I
have learned to listen more and be more attentive to what the game
documentation says."

It is interesting to see the accessible games industry creating online
group multiplay games. The fun part of this type of game is joining
with groups of friends, moving through cities, going on quests for
items, having adventures and fighting enemies together. These games
come with a chat program so you can communicate with your friends
as you quest around the world. Players log on with a user name and
password and pay a monthly fee to play the game and for good reason:
hours of entertainment at their fingertips.

This style of game typically takes mainstream companies four years to
create. This is roughly equivalent to producing a movie as nearly all
the same concepts and resources apply to it. It is common to have a
staff of around five full-time programmers, content writers to create
scripts that voice actors must act out, graphic designers to create
pictures to represent cultures, tribes and characters in the world.
Finally, sound engineers and musicians must co-ordinate their sounds
and music to fit these and the programming team must programme the
engine to render all content. To say the least, multiplay games are a
very involved and extremely expensive effort.

At BSC Games we are in the initial exploratory phase of programming
a game with both graphics and audio for the blind and sighted to play
together. One setback has been finding qualified programmers to assist
on the project, and trained consultants to instruct us on it. We are
progressing and hope our next title will be internet-enabled.

More generally, accessible games developers are slowly making
progress with programming multiplay games - some companies have
accomplished this large task already. Our progress is slower, but
consistent. Because of our limited resources, we have to take smaller
steps than mainstream game companies but there is a cameraderie
among us accessible games developers that you don't often see in other
industries.

In terms of the future of accessible game development, I think initially
you will see one-on-one internet-based games then, as resources
permit, larger games where you can play in teams and quest around
worlds. Typically, the worlds in these types of games are endless. That
is what makes them so fun.

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.

Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.

Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.

For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Two: Focus
- IT Procurement.

+08: How To Buy Software And Not Break The Law
by Ruth Loebl.

Have you heard of the public sector duty to promote disability equality,
which forms part of the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA)? From
the perspective of voluntary bodies and charities like the Royal
National Institute of the Blind, the duty (known as the Disability
Equality Duty, or DED) is a great step forward. From your perspective
it may have had little impact. But if you are involved in IT
procurement, you should know about it.

The Disability Rights Commission (DRC) publishes a code of practice
( http://www.drc-gb.org/thelaw/publicsectordutycodes.asp )
that offers practical guidance about the DED to public authorities. One
of the examples given by the code reads as follows: "A government
department that is planning to procure a new IT system should ensure
that its action plan includes the work it will do to ensure that the new
system is suitable for use by disabled employees. The action plan
should also indicate the way it will develop the specification so that the
system delivers the right products for disabled customers. This might
include having a means of identifying those customers and their
requirements, which could lead to being able to, for example, print
notifications and letters in accessible formats for visually impaired
people."

The RNIB's legal team receives a large number of complaints about
citizens' interaction with government. Sometimes 'The System' cannot
produce the information in a format that the service user can actually
read. Sometimes it can, but there is no way to indicate that an
alternative format is required, so print is sent out every single time, and
the recipient then has to go back and request the format he or she
actually needs. Every single time.

The most effective time to address this issue is during procurement, as
the DRC's code of practice suggests, but what if there is no accessible
option on offer by suppliers? This is a situation that arose about six
years ago with a software system called CareFirst, a system designed
to help local authorities run their social services.

In 1999, Glasgow City Council was beginning to implement CareFirst
in its social services department, and all was going well. The system
met all the council's business requirements, it made data collection and
reporting much more efficient, and seemed sure to improve services to
clients. But there was a problem - CareFirst was not accessible, and
Glasgow employed quite a number of blind people who would need to
use the system, as well as serving many residents who as service users
would need accessible output.

Glasgow contacted quite a few other CareFirst customers, and found
they had the same problem. Together with RNIB, they approached the
software developer OLM Group
( http://www.olmgroup.com/ ),
and explained what was needed. With considerable effort, OLM, RNIB
and the users fixed the immediate problems by redesigning some of the
software's interfaces and configuring them for speech output.

So far so good, but the truth is a one-off fix is never going to change an
inaccessible product to an accessible one. The real trouble was that
OLM didn't really see the point of putting a lot of effort into
accessibility, which they perceived as being peripheral to their main
business objectives.

"During the initial testing and configuration to get the system working
effectively it became apparent that this was going to be a long term
task and that the costs could potentially be significant," says Brian
Paterson of Glasgow City Council. "We also realised that other users
were all at different levels of knowledge, understanding and
development. It therefore made sense to look at a consortium
approach."

The CareFirst Access Consortium was duly formed in 2002, comprised
of CareFirst customers from local authorities around the UK.
Membership fees contributed to the campaign and to supporting end
users, as well as setting up an accessible web site
( http://www.cfaccess.org.uk/ ).

Realising that numerous customers throughout the UK felt that
accessibility was an issue that needed to be addressed, OLM started to
appreciate the benefits of an accessible product to all users, not just to
those few using speech output.

The process needed more time than consortium members initially
anticipated - it has taken six years from that initial contact - but when
OLM recently announced the latest version of CareFirst, the
consortium was able to endorse it as a fully accessible product, making
it a major success story.

The software has now changed to a browser-delivered application,
usability is vastly improved (not only for disabled people but for all its
users), and it has cost OLM no more to develop into an accessible
version than it would to have made it inaccessible. The consortium's
work is done, and it will shortly be disbanded.

Together, the consortium's members have learned a lot about how to
make software accessible, and not just the technical stuff. We learned
that a lot of very small steps forward can lead to tremendous outcomes,
given time. We learned about the power of collaboration, uniting many
disparate interests behind a common objective.

We learned there can be benefits for suppliers in compliance as well:
with awareness of the DED rising, OLM may well be asking procurers
whether their competitors' products are compliant with the provisions
of the DDA.

But perhaps the most important lesson of all is that suppliers listen
hardest to customers, not to well-meaning representatives of user
communities like RNIB. Money talks louder than discussion about the
benefits of accessibility.

NOTE: Ruth Loebl is Senior ICT Development Officer at the RNIB
( http://www.rnib.org.uk/technology ).

[Section Four ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2006 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
