+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 80, AUGUST 2006.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by:
RNIB
( http://www.rnib.org.uk )
BT Age and Disability Unit
( http://www.btplc.com/age_disability/ )
Ford Motor Company
( http://www.ford.co.uk )

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Special Notice: 'e-Access '06' - Technology For All.
- 14 September 2006
- New Connaught Rooms, London.

'e-Access'06' is the UK's leading annual event on access by people
with disabilities to all technologies. The conference and exhibition
focuses on how digital technology both enables and prevents people
with disabilities to achieve greater independence.

Speakers include Peter White, BBC Disability Affairs Correspondent;
Kevin Carey, vice-chair RNIB and Ofcom Content Board Member;
and Guido Gybels, Director of New Technologies, RNID. Sponsors
include BSkyB, BT, Jadu and Ford.

Places cost 195 pounds for public sector, 295 pounds for private sector
and 145 pounds for small charities and not-for-profit organisations (all
prices exclude VAT) See:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess06/ .

[Special Notice ends]


++Issue 80 Contents.

++Section One: News.

01: Google Research Labs Launches Accessible Search Service
- pages ranked according to accessibility rating.

02: Access To Work Funding Closed To Central Government
- funding for disabled employees handed to private sector.

03: Voice Activation Software Offers 99 Per Cent Accuracy
- new version of product for PCs and mobile devices launched.

04: Free Screen Reader Released Online
- Thunder goes on the market, free to individual users.

News in Brief: 05: Shopping Trip - supermarket sites reviewed; 06:
Cheap Talk - free and discounted; 07: Sprechen ze English? - free
online language courses.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Records Straight - British Museum responses; 09: E-Group Debate
- continuing discussion on forums' accessibility.

Section Three: Focus - Accessible DVD.
10: A Victory for Persistent Pestering: Navigating DVDs can be hard
work even when they contain audio description but, a prototype
product was unveiled at last month's Sight Village conference, that
looks set to improve DVD accessibility. Dan Jellinek heard the latest
on this and other key developments in audio description.

Section Four: Focus - Accessible Gaming Part One
11: The Fight for Real World Innovation. Exciting developments are
underway in the real and virtual worlds of accessible games
development - just as well, according to one expert, who says
imagination in the area of audio games has been lacking. Mel Poluck
reports.

[Contents ends].


++Sponsored Notice: BT's Age and Disability Unit
- Helping People to Communicate.

Communication is at the heart of BT's business, and the aim of BT's
Age & Disability (A&D) unit is to increase disabled people's
opportunities to communicate with the world around them.

Our research suggests that 23 million adults might be digitally
excluded by 2025 if more is not done to encourage their use of the
Internet. Our online guide to broadband
http://www.btplc.com/age_disability/technology/broadband/guide/
provides our older and disabled customers with a step by step guide to
understanding and ordering broadband, specific examples of how
broadband may benefit them including case studies, and a number of
easy options for ordering BT Broadband.

For more information about BT's Age and Disability work visit
http://www.btplc.com/age_disability/ .
[Sponsored Notice ends].

Section One: News.

+01: Google Research Labs Launches Accessible Search Service.

Search engine giant Google has launched a service that prioritises its
search results according to the accessibility of web pages it finds. In
addition to standard search criteria, Google Accessible Search
( http://labs.google.com/accessible/ )
is designed to rank pages according to how much graphic content they
contain and how easy they are to navigate using keystrokes only.

According to project leader TV Raman, of Google's research labs,
Accessible Search is the first step in the company's strategy to make
online content more easily available to people with disabilities. "The
launch of Google Accessible search is a positive step towards our
overall goal of making the world's information accessible and we're
very excited about it," he told E-Access Bulletin.

According to Raman, work on Google Accessible Search is far from
finished. "This is an early stage Labs product, and we are planning to
enrich our features and functionality based on user feedback," he said.
Future developments will include versions tailored to different
countries, available in new languages. "Our goal is to provide a more
useful and accessible web search for the future and as part of this
commitment we'll continue to refine and improve upon Accessible
Search in many ways including eventually making it available in other
languages and countries," he said.

"In the past, visually challenged and blind Google users have often
waded through a lot of inaccessible websites and pages to find the
information they want or need. While we still have a lot of work to do,
Accessible Search is an important step and I hope it improves web
search accessibility for other people like me who are blind or visually
impaired," he said.

Interestingly, entering the search terms "search engine" produces
results that rank Google below one of its main competitors MSN,
suggesting that the company may need to improve the accessibility of
its own web pages.


+02: Access To Work Funding Closed To Central Government.

Disability groups have reacted with dismay to news that Access to
Work funding is to be cut for all central government departments. The
funding, which has been available since 1994, pays cash sums to
employers for modifications or specialist equipment needed by
disabled people in the workplace.

"We're very concerned about this, it doesn't augur well for the future,"
a spokesperson for the Disability Rights Commission (DRC -
http://www.drc-gb.org/)
told E-Access Bulletin. According to the DRC, payments under the
Access to Work scheme have already stopped at the Department for
Work and Pensions, the central government body responsible for
administering the scheme, and other departments will follow suit.

According to DRC, the cuts will make it more difficult for central
government departments meet their own commitments for employing
people with disabilities. "They are already miserably off-target," said
the spokesperson. In addition, the cuts come at a time of government
reforms to the incapacity benefits system aiming to encourage
recipients back into work. "Our position is that if this is achieved by
punishment, penalties and sanctions, without the support disabled
people need it would be brutalism of the worst sort," said the DRC.

According to DWP, the Access to Work funding previously made
available to central government will now be paid to private sector
employers. However, according to the DRC, the government's efforts
to raise awareness of the funding have been poor. "It's been one of the
best kept secrets of central government," said the spokesperson.
According to a report presented to Parliament in October 2005, three-
quarters of British employers have never heard of the scheme
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/mem1 ).


+03: Voice Activation Software Offers 99 Per Cent Accuracy

A new product from voice technology developer Nuance, Dragon
Naturally Speaking 9, offers unprecedented levels of voice control over
PCs and handheld devices.

The product
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/dragon1),
which removes the need for keystrokes and mouse movements, is
claimed by Nuance to be 20 per cent more accurate than the product it
replaces, taking accuracy levels to around 99 per cent.

Naturally Speaking 9 can also process voice input at speeds up to 160
words per minute, which means that it is faster and more precise than
typing. Nuance also claims that enhancements to the software
eliminate the need for lengthy training to respond properly to the user's
voice.
The new release integrates with Microsoft Office, Outlook and Internet
Explorer, as well as Corel and WordPerfect products. Naturally
Speaking is also compatible with popular open source-based products
such as Mozilla Firefox and Thunderbird. The product also supports
wireless technology, being compatible with Nuance-approved
Bluetooth headsets.
"It's a tremendous product, there's nothing else like it," Brian Hartgen
of TandT Consultancy told E-Access Bulletin.

+04:  Free Screen Reader Released Online.

A free screen reader has been launched at Sight Village, the annual
vision impairment conference dedicated to blindness issues in
Birmingham, UK.

The software, called Thunder, which provides all on-screen content as
'spoken' audio output, can be downloaded from Screenreader.net
( http://www.screenreader.net ),
a new, non-profit, community interest company (CIC) from Choice
Technology. Thunder was developed in partnership with international
assistive technology UK company Sensory Software
( http://www.sensorysoftware.com/ ).

The screen reader is free to individual users, although organisations
must pay a yearly subscription according to their size. Users will need
a computer running Windows 2000, XP or Vista as well as speakers or
headphones. "It will meet most of the needs of many blind users
whether beginners or seasoned operators," Roger Wilson-Hinds, co-
director of Screenreader.net, told E-Access Bulletin.
"Apart from being free to blind home users, there is far less chance of
conflict with other software running on a computer. This has very
positive support implications and is great for family users"
Other screen readers on the market include the widely-used 'JAWS for
Windows' from US company Freedom Scientific, which costs 800
pounds and Window Eyes from GW Micro, also in the US, which costs
380 pounds. Another free screen reader 'Orca' is currently under
development as the default screen reader of Ubuntu, an operating
system based on the Linux open source platform.

"We support anything that will give visually impaired people more
access to technology at a lower cost," RNIB's Head of Products and
Publications John Godber, in response to the launch.


++News in Brief:

+05: Shopping Trip: The Tesco website is the only supermarket site to
exceed minimum accessibility requirements according to the 'State of
the e-nation' report from AbilityNet. The research used manual and
automated checks to review accessibility and usability. Morrisons was
found to be the second most accessible although visitors cannot buy
directly from the site:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/an1 .

+06: Cheap Talk: Some 300 talking glucose meters are to be made
available to vision impaired Diabetics on low incomes following a
Diabetes UK campaign about the high cost of the device. The price of
the Sensocard Plus Meter, which measures blood glucose levels, has
been lowered from 150 to 50 pounds and is available from Diabetes
UK, among others:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/diab1 .

+07: Sprechen ze English?: Free online English and German language
courses aimed at vision impaired learners have gone live. Intermediate
and advanced courses are offered to native speakers of Czech, English,
German, Norwegian, Slovak and Spanish. The courses aim to enhance
employment opportunities. The courses have been designed to work on
both open source and proprietary browsers:
http://eurochance.brailcom.org/ .


[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Records Straight: Matthew Cock of the New Media Unit at the
British Museum writes in response to a story published in the last
issue, 'British Museum Launches Audio Described Online
Collections.' Matthew writes: "I would like to set a few things straight
about the two features we've launched. We've added one new tour with
Audio Description of 20 objects to COMPASS
(www.thebritishmuseum.ac.uk/compass),
not a series of tours, as your article stated.

"The article says '. . . some people reported the galleries' audio
programmes to be lacking in detail.' We're not aware of any problems
or comments on the content of the tours and we're not clear what you
mean by the 'galleries' audio programmes. We've offered a web-based
service for the Museum's web visitors, not at this stage part of any
wider programme in the British Museum or sector.

"The article also states 'There are links on each web page
containing an mp3 sound file of a description of a specific object
which can be downloaded onto portable mp3 players.' This is in fact
the primary way that we have offered the audio files. Visitors to the
site can listen to the audio through their web browser, or download the
file for future use on their mp3 players.

"Regarding the text-to-speech facility, Readspeaker, which we've
launched on children's COMPASS
(www.thebritishmuseum.ac.uk/childrenscompass),
is aimed mainly at children with reading difficulties, and not, as you
say in your article, visually impaired. We've been very careful not to
claim this as a facility primarily aimed at improving access for blind
and partially sighted users, as we have been advised that Readspeaker,
is not an adequate substitute for screen readers or magnification
software.

"I'm sorry to say audio is not yet available on any of the public access
terminals inside the Museum, though this is of course highly desirable,
and something we're working on offering in the future."
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com]


Gustaw Kon from Germany also writes in response to the British
Museum story: "It is good that your sponsors got their advert. Their
product is pricey and only suitable for organisations.

"No mention was made of the URL of the British Museum audio
description site. Kind of useless really! [You could] just give the web
address and let all those interested log on and make their own decisions
and comments. Simple, don't you think? Cheap too, dare I say
obvious?

[Editor's Note: Readspeaker are not currently sponsors of any of our
activities, and the decision to cover the story was made independently
by
our editorial team. The omission of the web address was regrettable,
however, and an oversight: we always intend to list all relevant web
addresses in our stories. So apologies for that.]
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com]


+09: E-Group Debate: The debate on accessible e-groups continues.
Deborah Hart of Women in London's Microyster computer group
writes: "I was so astonished to see [Rich Caloggero's] reply to the
enquiry you posted for me. Anyone who has used Yahoo will know
that to configure a group you have to access the options via the
web. Not only does this take you through the hideous process of
creating a Yahoo identity - Google groups at least have an accessible
alternative to the captcha graphic they use - but then all the other
options of whether the group is to be private, how emails are to be
delivered, etc, have to be set up via the web. This is also true for
individual subscribers who may want to only receive emails as a
digest.

"This is very disheartening. Despite the millions of pounds going
into voluntary sector ICT via the Change Up scheme, very few
practical day-to-day working solutions are likely to result, just more
websites, and second tier groups giving theoretical advice.

I suspect a Mailman [the free software for managing electronic mail
discussion and e-newsletter lists] type list would be easier to
administer, but this type of service is usually out of the league of small
self help groups. I was hoping to hear of a system that would allow a
group of women with disabilities to be independent of 'help'.
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com].

On the same topic and in response to Rich Caloggero's contribution on
e-groups last issue, Kim Walker writes: "I am a freelance computer
adviser assisting charities for the disabled in Edinburgh, Scotland. A
chat group for some disabled people is required and Yahoo groups may
be the answer but, although it is good to see that [their] Captcha is not
a problem, is the Yahoo groups' site W3C Web Accessibility Initiative
approved? Is it truly accessible to people using screen readers, switch
access, on-screen keyboards or keyboards only, for example? If not,
could you recommend any Bobby approved sites that would qualify,
which are not barred by the Captcha problem?
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com].

[Inbox ends]


++Section Three: Focus
- Accessible DVD.

+10: A Victory for Persistent Pestering.
by Dan Jellinek.

The menus on DVD disks are hard enough to navigate for sighted
people, with jumbles of animated images often overlaid with confusing
text menus leading to different episode or scene selections, and other
disk features.

For blind people, however, finding one's way around a disk is all but
impossible, even if the disk features an audio description track which
allows them to enjoy and understand the film itself. The problem is,
how does the user know how to access the audio description track, or
how to choose an episode, or even know which disk is which?

At last month's annual Sight Village conference in Birmingham
( http://www.qac.ac.uk/sightvillage ),
for which E-Access Bulletin was the main media partner, a prototype
talking DVD disk was unveiled by the RNIB aimed at tackling these
problems.

Currently in development in partnership with the BBC, which has
implemented it on its new Doctor Who DVDs, the disk automatically
starts with audio navigation, and then you use up and down arrows to
access spoken commands such as Episode Selection, Play All or
Special Features. Other functions reveal how many options there are,
and give an overview of the disk's entire contents.

"For the first time, absolutely everything on the disk's menus can be
accessed through sound," Joan Greening of the RNIB told delegates.

The Dr Who disks talk as soon as you put them into an ordinary
mainstream DVD player. "It says 'Series 1, Disk 3', or whatever, so it
is immediately clear which one it is out of a potential jumble of disks.
How often have you dropped the lot on the floor?" Greening said, to
sympathetic murmurs from the audience.

Greening says the RNIB would like this prototype development work
to lead to an industry standard for audio navigation, but it would be a
de facto standard rather than a formal technical standard with the RNIB
as its guardian. "We just want it to be out there."

As well as audio navigation, which was needed on all disks, as many
films as possible needed to be audio described, she said. The whole
Doctor Who series is audio-described, following talks with the RNIB,
as are around 150 films, most of which are listed on the RNIB website
at:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/dvd

Audio description is now part of the mainstream product for these
DVDs, something for which the RNIB and other campaigners had been
pressing for years, Greening said. "It will normally say on the back of
the box if it is audio described".

Notable recent victories for Greening's own long-term, dogged
campaigning work for RNIB have been pledges from Buena Vista and
Warner Brothers to audio describe all future films, she says. Part of the
problem faced has been identifying the right person to lobby in each
film company, she says, as most do not have anyone tasked specifically
with improving the accessibility of their output. But her persistence has
paid off. "I'm like a dog with a bone, I don't give up, and I can pull in
people to support us like people from the UK Film Council.

"Without RNIB there would be no audio description in this country, it
would not be in the cinemas, it would not be on DVDs. If you ever go
to broadcasting meetings, there is never anyone there representing
blind people unless we are there. But we're there now at Ofcom and
other meetings. Now we're leading the world in audio description.

Also on display in Birmingham this year was the Digital Media Centre
from Portset Systems, the first receiver and player for TV, radio and
teletext purpose-built for blind people
( http://www.portset.co.uk/pdmc.htm ).

The Portset device is the size of a largeish set-top box, and
automatically tunes in to receive all Freeview TV channels, radio and
teletext and output all signals as audio only. No TV screen is needed,
although the device can have a picture signal routed through it to a TV
set and tune in to a different channel at the same time.

A series of large, colourful buttons of different shapes laid out in
logical clusters allows users to navigate channels and access an
electronic programme guide that includes current and future
programme start, finish and running times, plus descriptions of what is
on now and what is on next. A teach mode helps users learn keypad
functions and layouts.

The device receives digital radio, although it does not convert the text
information stream broadcast with digital radio into an audio stream. It
can record radio or TV onto an internal hard drive with a
programmable timer setting, although it does not connect to a
computer. It can play CDs and an upgrade to the system allows it to
play DVDs, although it cannot record to DVD.

At a cost of 859 pounds, it is not cheap, so it remains to be seen how
many users will opt for specialist systems such as this now rather than
wait to see if cheaper mainstream technologies are made more
accessible and usable through innovations like the DVD audio
navigation being developed by the RNIB and the BBC.

[Section three ends].


++Section Two - Focus
Accessible Gaming Part One

+00: The Fight for Real World Innovation
by Mel Poluck.

"There are too few examples of game accessibility," Richard van Tol
told E-Access Bulletin at last month's annual game developers
conference Develop held this year in Brighton, England and hosted by
Independent Game Developers Association ( IGDA -
http://www.igda.org/ ).

There are around 200 audio games - those that use only sound to guide
players - in existence today. Many are based on traditional board
games such as Monopoly with sound added to represent players
moving squares, picking a card and so on. But the majority are "boring
and behind the times," according to van Tol, of the Bartiméus
Accessibility Foundation
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/bart1 )
in the Netherlands, and a member of IGDA's game accessibility
special interest group (GA SIG -
http://www.igda.org/accessibility/ ).

"If you compare games from five years ago to now, there's hardly any
increase in quality," said van Tol. He said the audio quality of many
accessible games is basic, with some even sounding akin to alarm
clocks. "That's what we're trying to change with the SIG," he said.
Van Tol said many of the most innovative and exciting examples of
accessible or audio games are to be found in the form of research and
development projects of University students and this must change.

The GA SIG has among it's objectives: ". . . to help bridge the
knowledge gap about how to increase the accessibility of mainstream
games that exists between disability groups and game developers and
game developers and publishers." In closing or at least narrowing this
chasm, the group acts as an intermediary between disabled gamers and
the mainstream game development industry, and informs companies
creating accessible games will ultimately increase their market.

The group also notifies companies when they unwittingly create
accessible games, a not uncommon occurrence according to van Tol.
Video or arcade games are good examples. "Many are automatically
accessible but the developers don't know that," said van Tol. "The
genre of 'beat-em-up' games is really accessible," he told E-Access
Bulletin. Last year the GA SIG told the company behind one popular
mainstream games console their efforts to add extra features such as
adjustable font size, considered "cool" and perhaps even gimmicky to
sighted players, were in fact making their games accessible to vision
impaired gamers and consequently opening their market.

Now, in the bid to lift flagging innovation and encourage the
development of more imaginative accessible games, the GA SIG has
invited some of the world's largest technology companies to submit
games accessible to the widest possible audience for a worldwide
contest, 'Accessibility idol.' Contestants will demonstrate their
accessible game in a 'show' in the style of the popular TV singing
contest Pop Idol at the Game Developers Conference in San Francisco
next March. The GA SIG team are seeking judges and disabled
'coaches' to advise contestants as their game develops.

Another competition from game remake company Retro Remakes
( http://www.retroremakes.com/comp2006/ )
calls on contestants to create: 'good remakes of good games that
anyone can play, regardless of their ability.'

And games programmers and writers are invited to submit entries for a
contest for a contest from free online computer software resource
Donation Coder
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/agame1 ),
based in the US. Entrant submit their games in two categories: audio-
only or 'switch' games, where the only input is a single button, such as
the spacebar, for people with mobility impairments.

But there are new signs emerging of innovative accessible games
development. One of the most exciting examples is a location-based
game for vision impaired and sighted players that uses satellite
navigation system Global Positioning System (GPS) and 3D sound to
guide vision impaired players to move around a large physical area
such as a field or large room as they play. A shooting game, the player
is equipped with a backpack containing a laptop, headphones, a GPS
module, a head tracker and a modified joystick. The development
team, comprising seven students under the Bartiméus Accessibility
Foundation, are presently seeking funding to release the game, Demor,
on the market.
( http://www.demor.nl/ ).

But to improve the accessibility overall of games, and to begin to make
imaginative, exciting games the norm, van Tol calls on gamers
themselves to make a noise. "I've noticed especially on [blind gamers'
online magazine] Audessey, many gamers want to make themselves
heard. The blind community is active but only within its own silo,"
said van Tol. "We need a community of disabled gamers to stand up
and talk to the industry and make themselves heard more."
[Section Four ends].

++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2006 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
