+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 74, FEBRUARY 2006.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
(http://www.headstar.com/eab/).
Sponsored by RNIB (http://www.rnib.org.uk).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 74 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: Stand-Alone Device To Access Audio Content Over The Web
- charity to release 'SpeakOn' later this year.

02: Talking Cash Machines Live Following Successful Trials
- England's first talking ATM live in Leeds.

03: Inaccessible Web Sites 'Could Lose Billions'
- latest AbilityNet research finds.

04: Blind Computer Trainer Awarded Volunteer Of The Year
- Somerset man's work recognised.

News in Brief: 05: Raised Standards - code of practice to be published;
06: Audio Brainteaser - Audio Sudoku released; 07: Shining Example
- Moon site live.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Copyright Conundrum - online library access explained; 09:
Calling Out - mobile phone advice; 10: TV Guide - digital TV
guidance request; 11: Position Vacant - jobs source query; 12: Poor
Reception - radio hobbyist's appeal.


Section Three - Focus -
13: Podcasting - The Future Is Pod-Shaped: Whether 'vodcasting,' or
'godcasting,' podcasting has undeniably opened up a wealth of online
content to users. Carli Hawes investigates some of the latest accessible
innovations in the online audio phenomenon.

Section Four - Lecture Report -
14: Turing Lecture 2006 - A Brighter Future: Lack of accessibility and
high prices still cause barriers to everyday technology for people with
vision impairment, but blind assistive technology expert Chris Mairs
says the future may not be so gloomy. Mel Poluck heard him speak at
this years' Turing Lecture.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: GIS In the Public Sector
- An EGB Seminar, 8 March 2006
- Places Limited, Sign Up Today
- Royal Institute of British Architects, London.

Accessibility will be among topics to be discussed at E-Government
Bulletin's second annual Geographical Information Systems (GIS)
conference.

A huge proportion of public sector service data includes an address or
location element, and electronic mapping underpins many modern web
and intranet services. The event will cover what technologies are out
there, how they could improve services and how they could save your
organisation money.

Places cost 295 pounds plus VAT for public sector and 395 for private
sector delegates, with additional delegates booking at the same time
receiving a 100 pounds discount. Places are limited, so sign up today
for the public sector GIS event of the year. For more information see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/gis .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: Stand-Alone Device To Access Audio Content Over The Web.

A stand-alone device that provides access to selected news and
entertainment audio web content without the need for high IT skills is
planned for a launch later this year by a UK-based assistive technology
charity.

The 'SpeakOn', developed by a-technic
(http://www.a-technic.net ),
will be about the size of a digital TV set-top box, and plug in to a
phone socket to play its output through any standard speaker, TV or hi-
fi. It will use software developed by a-technic trustee Professor Isaac
Porat from the University of Manchester to present choices of content
and download it automatically from the internet.

Content offered will include DAISY-formatted books, MP3 music
files, internet radio stations, podcasts and other web site content
including online newspapers. Users will not need to access web sites
directly, making the system well-suited for vision-impaired users
without high IT skills.

"You won't realise you're going to a web site," said A-Technic
founder and chairman Chris Mairs. "If you select the Guardian web
site, under the covers [content] is whizzed off the internet but users
won't know that."

The device will be operated by a simple keypad similar to that of a
phone. Four raised navigation buttons arranged around a moveable nob
will allow users to scroll and select their choice, for example tracks
from a music playlist or articles from an online newspaper.
Subscription deals are still being sought for music download and audio
newspaper content, but once there are in place the device will be
released at a price of no more than 500 pounds, Mairs said.


+02: Talking Cash Machines Live Following Successful Trials.

Yorkshire Bank is the first English bank to introduce talking cash
machines to its branches, following successful trials of the technology.
The new machines will be phased in as older equipment is replaced.

The bank has deployed a talking cashpoint at its new flagship branch in
Albion Street, Leeds, following trials at two other branches in Leeds
and Hull in July 2005 and trials in Belfast, Northern Ireland and
Glasgow, Scotland at sister banks the Northern Bank and Clydesdale
Bank respectively. More branches are expected to follow, according to
a Yorkshire Bank spokesperson.

Talking ATMs (automated teller machines) enable vision-impaired
customers to hear details of their accounts and transactions spoken
through a standard set of headphones when plugged into a socket on
the front of the machine. To ensure privacy, customers are given the
option of switching off the visual screen while carrying out
transactions.

For more on previous trials see 'Talking Cashpoint Machines in Small-
Scale European Tests', E-Access Bulletin July 2005.


+03: Inaccessible Web Sites 'Could Lose Billions'.

Web site owners stand to lose billions of pounds worth of business if
they fail to tackle basic accessibility problems, according to research
from technology access charity AbilityNet
( http://fastlink.headstar.com/ability1 ).

The charity surveyed the internet habits of 100 people with disabilities
including vision impairment, and found that they tended to go to
mainstream web sites for information, shopping, banking and leisure
rather than to web sites specifically focused on their disability. The top
ten most popular web destinations cited were the BBC, Nationwide
building society, Google, eBay, Amazon, the Guardian and Times
newspapers, Lastminute.com, Premierleague.com and Yahoo.

A major factor in these choices is greater accessibility of these web
sites compared with their rivals, said the report. The survey found that
many web sites are inaccessible due to basic design flaws. Typically,
the size of text cannot be adjusted, images are not labelled properly,
and animations are used extensively

Web site owners who are complacent about these issues risk losing
valuable business to their rivals, according to the report's author Robin
Christopherson. "These potential internet users represent a spending
power in excess of 120 billion pounds. The arguments are compelling.
Whether from a moral, legislative or commercial perspective, suppliers
of goods, services and information on the internet are ignoring a highly
significant market sector at their peril," he said.


+04: Blind Computer Trainer Named Volunteer Of The Year.

A blind volunteer from Somerset in the UK has won a prestigious
national award for his work training vision impaired people to use
computers, assistive technology and other electronic devices.

David Godly, who is a committee member for the charity Woodspring
Association for Blind People (WABP -
http://www.wabp.org.uk/ )
in Weston-super-Mare, North Somerset, was one of just five volunteers
selected from more than 2,000 volunteer nominees to receive an award,
winning in the 'Inspiration' category.

Godly has spent the last four years providing home training for vision-
impaired people, many of whom are older or isolated, to help them to
install and use specialist technology including screen readers, screen
magnifiers and adapted keyboards.

"I'm very concerned about blind people who don't go to work and
can't afford these machines," Godly told E-Access Bulletin. "I'm
trying to solve this in my own way." As part of his mission, Godly
began a scheme whereby he takes second-hand computers, installs free
demonstration versions of assistive technology software such as JAWS
on them and provides them to vision impaired people in the community
for free.

The awards mark the end of the Volunteer of the Year
( http://www.yearofthevolunteer.org )
initiative, which recognised the work of volunteers across England in
2005 and was led by Community Service Volunteers, the Volunteering
England Consortium and funded by the Home Office.


++News in Brief:

+05: Raised Standards: A code of practice on web accessibility is to be
published on 8 March by the British Standards Institution. The
'Publicly available specification' (PAS) was commissioned by the
Disability Rights Commission and is aimed at web site commissioners
and developers. 'PAS 78 - Guide to good practice in commissioning
accessible web sites' could become a full British Standard in around
two years:
http://fastlink.headstar.com/pas1 .

+06: Audio Brainteaser: An accessible version of the popular
mathematical puzzle Sudoku, 'Sudo-San,' has been released by
AudioGames.net. 'Mentor' Grandmaster San guides players by
speaking the contents of a row, column or square. The game also
features optional background sounds and music which change
gradually as the player progresses:
http://www.audiogames.net/sudosan .


+07: Shining Example: A web site dedicated to resources relating to
Moon - an alphabet of raised symbols allowing vision-impaired people
to read by touch - has gone live, offering resources for users and
teachers. The site features listings of Moon stockists, advice for
teachers and events listings among others and has been launched by a
partnership of disability organisations including RNIB and DeafBlind
UK:
http://www.moonliteracy.co.uk .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .


+08: Copyright Conundrum: Tony Dart, Chief Executive of online
library The Seeing Ear,
( www.seeingear.org )
writes in response to Rakesh Chand from Fiji, who wrote in the last
issue to request the library be opened up to vision-impaired people
outside the EU.

"I have had the unenviable task of having to refuse access to a number
of people who need this service, because they are outside this
geographical boundary," Tony writes. "The reason is simple. I have a
licence to publish copyrighted material issued by the UK Copyright
Licensing Agency and this forbids me to offer this service outside the
EU, even in the US where many of the books are published!

"That is the bad news. There is, however, something that anyone who
wants to see the online library in their own country can do. They can
write to me with details of the copyright law in their country, or where
I can obtain these details. Obviously, I am only interested in the law
that applies to vision impaired people and how they can obtain books! I
will try my very best to ensure that every print-disabled person can
enjoy access to what they want to read, when they want to read it."
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com please].


+09: Calling Out: Ibrahim Gucukoglu writes in response to Stephanie
Read's request for accessibility advice on her new mobile phone, the
Orange SPV C550 powered by Windows. "To obtain the most
accessible software for mobile phones," writes Ibrahim, "the mobile
needs to run the Symbian operating system
( http://www.symbian.com ).

[Accessible mobile phone software] TALKS, a popular screen reading
application will allow access to virtually all elements on the mobile
screen including battery status and signal icons, date and time as well
as other more useful functions including text messaging, email and
WAP access. Another application is Mobile Accessibility which as
well as providing speech, provides an excellent magnification
application to enlarge characters on the screen. As I have not used this
product myself, I can not vouch for its suitability but I am reliably
informed that it is a good alternative to TALKS as it is aimed at the
novice to intermediate user. I know of no product that works on
Windows-powered mobiles with the exception of Pocket PCs, but that
is an entirely different ball game."
[Further responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: TV Guide: Roger Petersen, a member of the Information Access
Committee of the American Council of the Blind writes: "We are
interested in improving the access for blind people in the US to
television, including navigation of set-top boxes, TiVos [the digital
video recorder] and all sorts of digital TV devices and systems. We
would be interested in any guidance that you could provide."
[Responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+11: Position Vacant: A reader writes to ask about sources for job
listings for assistive technologists: "I am an access technology
specialist in California looking for any resources for employment for
access technology specialists, such as job-opening lists, for anywhere
in Europe, Canada or the US. I have searched but have been unable to
find any such resources, other than an odd job here and there on
Monster.com or newspaper classified ads. I was hoping that [readers]
may know where organisations go to look for new employees. Any
ideas you might have would be greatly appreciated."
[Responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+12: Poor Reception: Giovanni Urso from Naples in Italy writes on the
accessibility of two-way radios and receiving devices. "The world of
radio amateurs and listeners has always been crowded with blind
people, who carry out this hobby with the utmost passion and devotion.
Unfortunately their commitment is not always reciprocated by the
manufacturers, who have rarely paid attention to the accessibility
issues of sight-impaired people.

"With the exception of Kenwood and a few other manufacturers, who
created voice-based software for reading the frequency when the two-
way radio is being tuned, and apart from the introduction of an
automated tuner allowing the amateur to reach any frequency without
damaging his or her radio, almost nothing has been done in this field.
As a result, it grows more and more difficult to cultivate this
interesting hobby. Many highly-developed devices appear every day on
the market, full of every kind of menu, but they are almost off-limits
for a blind person. Therefore, I believe it is high time to raise our
voices, so that the most important manufacturers of these devices pay
more attention to this range of customers, who are surely not few. I
hope you will welcome my appeal."
[Responses to inbox@headstar.com].

NB: Thanks to Margherita Giordano for translating Giovanni's
contribution.

[Section Two ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Three - Focus
- Podcasting.

+13: The Future Is Pod-Shaped
by Carli Hawes.

'Podcasting' has taken little over a year to become the newest internet
revolution. But while the technology may be just entertaining and fun
for most computer users, for blind and visually impaired people
podcasting could be the most important innovation in communication
technology since the invention of screen readers.

'Podcast' was a term coined in 2004 when the technology allowing
audio content to be broadcast online, received and stored on mobile
devices and computers became commercially popular. The word is
derived from a conflation of 'iPod' (the popular MP3 music file player
from Apple) with 'broadcast'. However, you do not need an iPod to
listen to podcasts, nor is the content broadcast in the traditional sense
of the word, which would only allow users to listen to one source at a
time at a predetermined time.

In fact, your podcast receiver software or 'podcatcher' allows you to
'subscribe' to as many audio programs as you want, which will be
downloaded automatically for you to listen to whenever and wherever
you want.

The software needed to download and play podcasts varies in its
accessibility to blind computer users. iTunes, the software application
from Apple, is hard to navigate, so despite being a free application
blind computers users have to purchase a 30 pound piece of additional
software available from T and T Consultancy Ltd
(http://www.tandt-consultancy.com/itunesscripts.html)
to translate the system into a series of easy to remember keystrokes.

There are a few podcatching systems that have been built specifically
for the blind. In the UK Alasdair King has developed a piece of
accessible software called WebbIE which allows blind users to
download and listen to podcasts or the radio by incorporating their own
screen reader or other access solution. "Web pages are often hard to
navigate for visually impaired people. WebbIE podcatcher software is
much more accessible," said King, "Podcasting is an infant technology
- as yet there is no Google directory equivalent, there is no way to
make it simpler in the mass market."

Meanwhile in the US Dr Susan Gerhart is working with a team of
students at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Prescott, Arizona
to produce a podcatcher fully accessible for blind people called
@Podder
( http://www.apodder.org/ ).
Gerhart's team is also compiling an extensive library of podcasts
relating to sight problems and the vision-impaired community. "Since
podcasting is only a year old, collectively we should be able to put a
well-organised library of audio information drawn from podcasts into
the hands of many who need the information and appreciate having a
community of similarly interested people," Gerhart says.

The huge new demand for podcasts has already resulted in an
abundance of variety shows, news bulletins, comedy shows, religious
sermons and political statements being produced every day.

The Daily Telegraph newspaper launched a daily news podcast in
December 2005. It currently offers extracts totalling around 20 to 30
minutes in duration. "We don't have plans to read out the whole
newspaper, it would take about eight hours and be very hard to
navigate," the Telegraph's podcast editor Guy Ruddle told E-Access
Bulletin. However the newspaper is eager to improve its services for
people with disabilities and has a meeting planned with the RNIB later
this month to discuss possible improvements to their current audio
service, he said.

As podcasting technology develops, people are finding more and more
inventive ways of using it. One eBay seller, Mark O'Neill, has added a
podcast link to a selection of his eBay auctions to try and encourage
blind computer users to venture onto the site and force the site's
developers to improve accessibility. "Many people who surf eBay may
have problems with their eyesight. Wouldn't they instead appreciate an
audio description of your item, instead of struggling to read your
auction text?" O'Neill said.

Producing your own podcast is not as complicated as you might think;
the requirements are a high quality microphone and a good
understanding of the podcast software you are using. Recording and
producing podcasts is a great opportunity for blind people to get their
voices heard, says Nick Apostolidis, a blind computer user and
technical adviser to E-Access Bulletin. "Podcasting is a lot like being a
journalist, you have to do research, find an audience and build a
reputation." The technology can support online communities of blind
people who can communicate with each other about all manner of
issues, he said.

The continued rise of podcasting can only be good news for blind and
visually impaired people. And with whispers that ITV is going to start
producing audio-only versions of popular TV shows such as the Bill
and Coronation Street, the future is looking promising.

[Section Three ends].


++Special Notice: Test Your Site's Accessibility.

Headstar, the publishers of E-Access Bulletin, is offering a range of
independent, expert assessment packages to ensure your web services
comply with best practice and the law. We can provide you with a
clear, detailed report on the current access status of your site, and a list
of tasks you will need to carry out to ensure compliance with
government requirements.

Reports also include results from general quality assurance tests such
as link-checking. Taking accessibility action benefits all users, will
make your site easier to maintain, and can improve your search engine
rating! Please note the service is tailored in particular to larger
organisations with major web sites or services.

For more information please email:
access-consult@headstar.com .

[Special notice ends].


++Section Four - Focus
- Turing Lecture.

+14: A Brighter Future
by Mel Poluck

"There are two common themes in developing specialist technology,"
Chris Mairs told listeners at the annual Turing lecture hosted this
month by the Institute of Electrical Engineers and the British Computer
Society. "Access for people with a disability will lag behind the
mainstream population and secondly, such technology is often
commercially unviable."

But Mairs is not easily deterred: he is co-founder of a
telecommunications company, Data Connection; founder of assistive
technology charity a-technic and winner of the world waterskiing
championships with the assistance of the Bat Blaster, a device he
developed and now sells through the charity.

The lack of viability of most assistive products is highlighted by the
costly and slow development period of the Bat Blaster, and the fact few
are manufactured, Mairs said. This results in an expensive product that
only the privileged few can afford, a situation all too familiar in the
specialist technology sector.

This model for manufacturing assistive technology will not be
sustainable, he said. "If we have to build specialist technology we
won't reach the 2025 objective," Mairs said. The objective was
contained in last year's 2005 Prime Minister's Strategy Unit report,
"Increasing the life choices of disabled people"
( http://www.strategy.gov.uk/work_areas/disability/ ),
which said: "by 2025, disabled people in Britain should have full
opportunities and choices to improve their quality of life and will be
. . . included as equal members of society."

The only way this target will ever be hit will be to build in accessibility
from the start, Mairs said. "Disability is very diverse. Building in
accessibility from day one is practical for all disabilities."

But the need for technology providers to provide new functionality and
new trends may be preventing them from incorporating accessibility
from the outset. "Manufacturers are reluctant to remove the 'sizzle' to
increase accessibility," Mairs said.

Many people with a disability are caught between a rock and a hard
place when trying to access computers, mobile phones and other
electronic devices. "Either they can't use them at all or they have to
use a specialist device, most of which are prohibitively expensive," he
said. Often, it is digital interfaces that make them inaccessible.
"Devices often exclude people that can't use those interfaces."

To compound the problem, digital interfaces - an on-screen menu for
example - have become cheaper to manufacture than traditional
button-based designs, Mairs said.

With so many obstacles to accessibility, one wonders where
manufacturers wanting to reach wider markets should begin. But
according to Mairs, two simple tenets should steer manufacturers in the
right direction: "You need appropriate interfaces between function and
content and you need affordable technology," he said.
In the meantime, Mairs is working on removing other obstacles - the
obstacles to making effective text-to-speech, particularly on the web.
Any aspect of, say, a web page of no consequence to the vision
impaired user should not be read aloud. "Audio [output] shouldn't have
the clutter associated with a visual interface," he said.

Mairs and his team are currently developing 'SpeakOn'
( http://www.a-technic.net/speakon.htm ),
a low cost computer that aims to solve this conundrum. Designed to
deliver only audible content such as podcasts; simplified web pages
and electronic books, it will be released later this year (see lead news
story, this issue).

While the picture Mairs paints of the current accessibility scene is far
from rosy, the future as he sees it is set to be brighter. "The explosion
of digital technology can provide enormous gains by creating specialist
devices," he told the audience. "The ever-reducing cost of resources,
the continuing trend of open multi-modal interfaces (presenting
information in more than one way) and improving legislation," he said,
are all leading to improved accessibility across the board.

"I believe we are at the watershed of opportunity to affect this 'random
walk' with technology," he said.

NOTE: The Turing lecture series is named in honour of Alan Turing,
one of the founding fathers of computer science:
(http://www.bcs.org/BCS/Awards/Events/TuringLecture/ ).

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Braille Translations.

Braille Translations provides a fast, cost-effective, high quality service
of translating any document into Braille. We are able to provide Braille
menus, public leaflets and business cards in Braille and help make you
compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act. We can translate
from large print, audio tape or audio CD.

We can also help with premises accessibility including Braille Tactile
Signs for toilets and other doors.

All work is proof-read before dispatch and we are able to provide an
express 24-hour service. Please call our offices for an immediate
quotation or for further information on Freephone number 08000 190
946; Mobile: 07903 996533; email ghow@brailletranslations.co.uk or
see:
http://www.brailletranslations.co.uk .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2006 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
