Date: 7/21/2006 09:39:45 +0100
From: "Dan Jellinek" <dan@headstar.com>
To: <eaccess@headstar.com>
Subject: E-Access Bulletin: July 2006

++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 79, JULY 2006.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by RNIB ( http://www.rnib.org.uk ).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Special Notice: 'e-Access '06' - Technology For All.
- 14 September 2006
- New Connaught Rooms, London.

'e-Access'06' is the UK's leading annual event on access by people
with disabilities to all technologies. The conference and exhibition
focuses on how digital technology both enables and prevents people
with disabilities to achieve greater independence.

Speakers include Peter White, BBC Disability Affairs Correspondent;
Kevin Carey, vice-chair RNIB and Ofcom Content Board Member;
and Guido Gybels, Director of New Technologies, RNID. Sponsors
include BSkyB, Jadu and Ford.

Places cost 195 pounds for public sector, 295 pounds for private sector
and 145 pounds for small charities and not-for-profit organisations (all
prices exclude VAT) See:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess06/ .

[Special Notice ends]


++Issue 79 Contents.

++Section One: News.

01: 'Pop Idol' Style Contest Launched To Find Accessible Games
- technology companies worldwide invited to submit offering.

02: MPs Urge 2012 Olympics Venues To Install Audio Description.
- Early Day Motion praises venues to have already done so.

03: Satellite Location Device 'Accurate To Within A Metre.'
- Spanish navigation device under development.

04: British Museum Launches Audio Described Online Collections.
- site adds audio feature for adults and children.

News in Brief: 05: Beta Blog - RNIB launches web log; 06: Read Me
- speaking handheld scanner; 07: Listen Up - podcast on mp3 players.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Any Takers? - access technology giveaway; 09: E-Group Response
-  reply about online community accessibility; 10: Opinion Response -
reader's views; 11: Input Wanted - web accessibility check; 12:
Seeking Reader - screen reader wanted.

Section Three:  Web Accessibility - User Testing.
13: Nevermind The Guidelines: A recent survey into the UK 's 'Top
20' council websites found local government still has some way to go
before all users can fully interact and access all its online information
and services. Stefan Haselwimmer reports on the details of the survey.

Section Four: Research - Web accessibility
14: Keeping In Context: Full access to the web by people with a vision
impairment is still patchy despite the work that has gone into raising
awareness and developing testing tools for designers and end users.
And while guidelines are important, context must always be a
consideration.

[Contents ends].


++Sponsored Notice - U Can Do IT
- Computer training for the vision impaired.

U Can Do IT is a charity which provides computer training for blind,
deaf and disabled people in their own homes.

The basic course consists of 10 training sessions and includes email,
surfing the web, and an introduction to newsgroups and chatrooms.

For more info call or write to: U Can Do IT, Highfield House,
4 Woodafall Street, London SW3 4 DJ
Telephone and Minicom: 020 7730 7766.
Fax: 020 7730 6822

[Sponsored Notice ends]


Section One: News.

+01: 'Pop Idol' Style Contest Launched To Find Accessible Games.

A major international 'Pop Idol' style competition to find the best
accessible computer games is being promoted as part of a range of
activities launched this week to raise awareness of the needs of
disabled gamers.

'Accessibility Idol', named after the popular TV show, is the
brainchild of the US-based International Game Developers Association
( IGDA -
http://www.igda.org/ ).

The contest will take the form of a show with finalists presenting their
accessible game to an audience at the Game Developers Conference
( http://www.gdconf.com/ )
in San Francisco, US, in March 2007. Some of the world's largest
software and gaming companies have been signed up or invited,
although the association has not yet publicly confirmed participants'
names.

The move follows the launch of two other contests launched this month
to find innovative, accessible games: one from Retro Remakes, which
redesigns classic video games
( http://www.retroremakes.com/comp2006/ )
and another from US-based free software company Donation Coder
( http://www.donationcoder.com/ ).

And last week, an IGDA special interest group hosted a day-long
workshop on accessible gaming held as part of the Develop computer
games conference held in Brighton, England
(http://www.tandem-events.com/workshops.html#accessibility ). E-
Access Bulletin will report in full on this workshop in our next issue.


+02: MPs Urge 2012 Olympics Venues To Install Audio Description.

A group of MPs has called for all sporting venues to install audio
description equipment to provide live commentary for blind fans, and
in particular to ensure all Olympic venues have this facility ahead of
the London games in 2012.

An Early Day Motion laid down in Parliament by the Labour MP
Andrew Miller and signed by over 40 other MPs praised managers at
Lord's cricket ground in London for going live last week with audio
description, and urged all other sports grounds and all Olympic venues
to follow suit
(http://edmi.parliament.uk/EDMi/EDMDetails.aspx?EDMID=31015&;
SESSION=875 ).

Miller is chair of the Parliamentary IT Committee (PITCOM) and a
member of the All-Party Parliamentary Olympic and Paralympic
Group. He told E-Access Bulletin: "When designing a sports venue,
you need to take into account the needs of people with all disabilities.
This is established in the Olympic ideals, a principle we've got to strive
towards. Every citizen has the right that you and I have to enjoy the
Olympics and support their country". However, he acknowledged
grounds faced challenges in installing the equipment, not least from
their cost.

Marylebone Cricket Club in London launched its ball-by-ball
commentary service at Lord's in association with the RNIB, BBC
radio's Test Match Special and BBC London. Commentary is
transmitted from the ground's media centre to headsets that can be
worn by blind and partially sighted spectators sitting anywhere around
the stadium.

Lord's Communications Officer Neil Priscott said: "We know that
there are a lot of blind and partially sighted cricket supporters, and it is
only right for us to have [these facilities]". Lord's also plays host to the
Blind Cricket Final, an annual event for blind players of a specially
adapted version of the game.

Audio description is already offered in several other cricket grounds
including Old Trafford in Lancashire and the Riverside ground in
Durham, though coverage is still far from complete.


+03: Satellite Location Device 'Accurate To Within A Metre.'

A prototype handheld device that uses next-generation satellite
technology to locate its holder to within a metre and speak the results
into an earpiece has been successfully tested, its Spanish inventors
have announced.

The 'MOMO' experiment could pave the way for talking location and
route-finding products for vision-impaired people about the size and
weight of a portable digital assistant (PDA). The user chooses options
from a spoken menu, entering their responses on a keypad.

The prototype has been developed by the Spanish company GMV
Sistemas on behalf of the European Space Agency, as part of a
programme to explore uses of the next generation European satellite
technology known as GALILEO.

To improve the accuracy of spatial information delivered to the user,
the MOMO device combines data from two sources: directly from
satellites, and also from ground-based computers over the mobile
phone network.

According to project leader Sara Gutiérrez-Lanza, the MOMO
technology could be developed into a commercial product in around
two years.

There are also other possible applications for the underlying
technology, she said. "MOMO is designed for pedestrians, but it could
also be integrated with public transport systems, such as the timetables
shown on information panels in buses and trains," she told E-Access
Bulletin.


+04: British Museum Launches Audio Described Online Collections.

The British Museum, one of the world's greatest collections of
historical artefacts, has added audio description features to its main
online collections for children and adults.

The museum has installed the Readspeaker SayIt tool
(http://www.readspeaker.com)
to allow web users to hear descriptions of all 5,000 key objects within
its 'COMPASS' and 'children's COMPASS' online collections, from
Michelangelo's drawings to the Rosetta stone. The service is also
available on terminals inside the museum.

The system, aimed at users with impaired vision or learning
difficulties, does not require the user to download any 'plug-in'
software for their web browser, though it does require a computer
sound card.

Audio description has also been added to a series of virtual tours of the
museum, each containing about 20 items from a selected culture, era or
subject such as silver statues or works by a particular artist.

The website also lets you change the font, colour and size in the
browser settings and features a text only version.

In addition, there are links on each web page containing an mp3 sound
file of a description of a specific object which can be downloaded onto
portable mp3 players for use in visits to the museum.

Unfortunately, there is a problem with the audio descriptions. Some
people reported the galleries audio programs to be lacking in detail. To
try to overcome these problems, the RNIB is sending 12 vision
impaired people to 50 different museums and art galleries to
investigate any problems faced.


++News in Brief:

+05: Beta Blog: A trial version of a web log or 'blog' focusing on
access to the web, including transcripts and podcasts of interviews
between key players from the world of web accessibility; as well as
web accessibility news and interviews, has been launched by the
RNIB. To visit or post a comment go to:
http://www.rnib.org.uk/wacblog/ .

+06: Read Me: A handheld device aimed at vision impaired users that
scans, speaks and stores printed material has gone on the market. The
K-NFB can read documents from computers, labels and books, among
others and has been developed by Kurzweil Technologies in
association with the National Federation of the Blind in the US.
Costing 2,625 pounds it is available in the UK from technology
company Sight and Sound:
http://www.knfbreader.com/ .

+07: Listen Up: A podcast on the pros and cons for blind users of
various brands of mp3 player is now available on Blind Cool Tech,
which provides audio downloads on lifestyle and technology issues.
The podcast lasts 40 minutes and takes the form of an interview
between two experts:
http://blindcooltech.xplorations.net/bct795MichaelLangInterview2.mp
.3 .

[Section One ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Any Takers?: Diana Monahan, who works with vision impaired
pupils in a mainstream school in Huddersfield in the UK, writes in
response to the debate on access to technologies in developing
countries. "I have kept a 'Eureka' and manuals that we can no longer
use in school as it is not compatible with our ICT curriculum, but I felt
I couldn't scrap it. Does anyone have a use for it, assuming I can make
it spring back to life after all these years? I have also lots of earlier
versions of access software that run on Windows 3.1 and Windows 95
and 98. Are they any use to someone in the third world or elsewhere or
should I just chuck them?"
[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: E-Group Response: Rich Caloggero writes in response to
Deborah Hart from Women in London computer group Microsyster
who asked for information on the accessibility of Yahoo e-groups.

"E-Groups are accessible, mostly due to the fact that you can subscribe
and unsubscribe directly via email and you don't need a Yahoo account
which means you don't need to deal with their inaccessible captcha
(anti-spam) tests. If your group is 'cars,' then you can send an email to
cars-subscribe@egroups.yahoo.com to subscribe yourself and to cars-
unsubscribe@egroups.yahoo.com to unsubscribe yourself."
[Further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: Opinion Response: Tim Connell, Managing Director of Quantum
Technology in New South Wales, Australia writes in response to Kevin
Carey's opinion feature in the June issue of the bulletin, which
suggested that the answer to true accessibility would only come
through improvements made by the larger mainstream technology
companies rather than smaller niche providers of accessibility tools.

"Kevin has really got it wrong on his opinion piece regarding the Holy
Grail. This attitude is one I describe as WMD (white, male, and
developed nation). At a time an estimated 90 per cent of the world's
blind don't have access to any technology at all, it is a bit rich (so to
speak) to suggest we abandon the small niche technology developers
and manufacturers.

"I wholly support the notion of universal design and agree this is a
critical issue for the blind community to embrace and champion.
However it shouldn't be at the expense of the "Techies working on
flimsy budgets with miniscule markets" because we offer the only
hope of technology solutions for the marginalised - most blind people
in developing nations - and the minorities within a minority, such as
the deafblind. To think that universal design is going to cater for all
these people in my lifetime or the next is fanciful.

"Kevin has a highly developed understanding of so-called "high"
technology and this is the focus of his comments. It is prudent
however, to remember the vast majority of blind students in the UK are
still embarking on the path to Braille literacy using either a device
from 1950 or 1830.

"There are many areas where the features of access technology can be
incorporated into mainstream technology, most notably software.
Hopefully the blind community can continue to embrace the small,
possibly not all profitable or dynamic, businesses that are dedicated to
the question of providing access, as well as embrace the notion of
universal design. I truly believe we need both."
[further responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+11: Input Wanted: Information Designer Stuart Spurring from charity
the Sensory Trust in the UK wants to see that his organisation's
website is accessible for vision impaired visitors. He writes: "Any
input from readers would be fantastic. The website is:
http://www.sensorytrust.org.uk ."
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


+12: Seeking Reader: Dhunjishah H. Bharucha from Atlanta, US
writes: "I was looking for a reader for my mother who has Macular
Degeneration. It was made by Vis-Ability, and is called the Ultra
Reader. It magnifies a page or book, and has the ability to flip pages
too. I have attempted to search for it, but am not successful. Have you
ever heard of it, or would you recommend a website that I would be
able to find more information about it? Thanks in advance."
[responses please to inbox@headstar.com].


[Inbox ends]

Section Three: Web Accessibility
- User Testing.

+13: Nevermind The Guidelines.
by Stefan Haselwimmer.

In the last couple of years central government has put pressure on local
authorities to make their websites comply with Web Accessibility
Initiative (WAI) standards. It is therefore not surprising that councils
see accessibility primarily in terms of technical accessibility
guidelines.

With the publication of the British Standards Institution's PAS 78
accessibility guidelines (free download at:
http://www.drc.org.uk/library/website_accessibility_guidance/pas_78.a
spx),
however, it is now important for councils to carry out disabled user
testing when evaluating website accessibility, rather than relying
purely on technical accessibility guidelines.

Testing your website with disabled people can highlight usability
issues that may make your website fundamentally inaccessible to
disabled users. Society of IT Management Body 'Socitm Insight,'
representing ICT management in local public services, therefore
commissioned the Usability Exchange
( http://www.usabilityexchange.com/ )
to carry out systematic disabled user testing on their "Top 20" council
websites, to get a sense of how accessible and usable council websites
were to real disabled people. Socitm's "Top 20" is a list of the best
council websites in the UK, based on the results of annual expert
review, Better Connected.

Each of the council websites was tested with a range of disabled users
including visually impaired and dyslexic users and individuals with
motor impairments. All testers were asked to attempt two tasks on each
of the 20 websites: find the council's phone number and report an
abandoned vehicle. Each tester recorded the time it took to complete
these tasks. They were also asked to note down any accessibility or
usability issues that they experienced during each task.

What were the results? The good news was that every tester found the
council's phone number in 19 of the 20 council websites tested. In
some cases users took an excessive amount of time to complete this
task but simple design changes, such as positioning the phone number
at the top of the home page, would have solved this problem.

With regard to the 'report an abandoned vehicle' task, the results were
rather more disappointing. In only 8 of the 20 websites tested did every
user report an abandoned vehicle successfully. The major problems
with this task arose from the difficulty of finding the abandoned
vehicle reporting system. Users had problems finding the reporting
system through the search engine and the A-Z index, or were confused
by where the reporting system was located - in some cases under
'Street defects' or 'Streetcare'.

Any efforts that may have been made to make the abandoned vehicle
reporting system accessible were of little benefit to disabled users who
could not locate the reporting system in the first place.

On both tasks a range of accessibility and usability problems were
reported by users, with every council receiving at least three reports of
an accessibility or usability problem overall. Most of the problems that
were identified were not traditional accessibility problems, such as
inaccessible forms or missing 'alt' tags, but usability issues. The
accessibility and usability problems that were identified were in
general easy to rectify.

The results show that even the best councils still have some way to go
to ensure their websites are really easy to use and fully accessible to
disabled people. Local councils should therefore carry out user testing
with disabled users in order to identify and eliminate any usability
issues that could affect these users.

Disabled user testing can transform the concept of accessibility within
local councils, from a theoretical concept concerned with technical
accessibility guidelines to something much more tangible and
compelling - there is nothing more compelling than hearing that a real
disabled user is having problems with your website.

NOTE: Stefan Haselwimmer is Managing Director of The Usability
Exchange.

[Section Three ends]


++Section Four: Research
- Web accessibility

+14: Keeping In Context

Accessibility of the web to end users, regardless of ability or browsing
environment, is widely accepted as a fundamental requirement if the
web is to reach its true potential as an enabler for the widest possible
audience. Indeed, the rights of web users with disabilities are becoming
ever more defined in anti-discrimination policy and legislation around
the world.

Unfortunately, studies have regularly shown that the accessibility of
websites falls short of an acceptable level. This is despite an ever-
increasing quantity of work that has gone into developing tools to
support web content providers in authoring accessible material and
evaluation of the accessibility of content; developing assistive
technologies for end users to allow disabled people to overcome or
reduce the impact of their impairment when interacting with web
content; and disseminating the importance of, and best practices in,
accessible web design.

The reasons behind the continuing disappointing levels of web content
accessibility have been widely discussed. What seems clear is that,
while still a factor, a lack of awareness of the importance of
accessibility among web developers and site commissioners is no
longer the predominant issue.

A key challenge is effective and appropriate implementation of
accessible web design techniques. Other challenges include the
perceived complexity and cost of the task of making a website
accessible, and also the need to unambiguously define what is actually
meant by 'accessible', understand what is required to develop a web
site to be considered to have met that definition, and to evaluate it such
that once can judge whether it has met the specified level of
accessibility. From the disabled web user's perspective, complicating
factors include the browsing and assistive technologies available, the
user's ability to use these technologies and the difference between the
technologies available and those most appropriate for the user's needs.

We argue that while work to optimise the accessibility of the web
through the publication and dissemination of a range of guidelines is of
great importance, there is also a need for a more holistic approach in
maximising the role of the web in enabling disabled people to access
information, services and experiences. The persistently disappointingly
low levels of usability of web content for disabled people indicates that
focusing on the adoption of accessibility guidelines by content authors,
tool developers and policy makers is not sufficient for a truly inclusive
web. This approach fails to acknowledge the role of the web as an
enabler in a broader context and may stifle creative use of web content
and experiences to enhance social inclusion.

Designing digital systems to meet the requirements of the people who
will be using it is the classic approach to usability. One can group
requirements into several categories.

User characteristics are the abilities and disabilities of the target users,
including perceptual, cognitive, motor, and linguistic abilities. Domain
requirements are the tasks that need to be supported, group, social and
cultural dynamics, communication patterns, environmental factors, and
so on. Technological requirements include issues such as availability
of hardware and software and the availability of plug-ins. Performance
requirements specify task success rates, task-completion times,
satisfaction ratings, and quality of task output, such as comprehension
outcomes in an e-learning environment.

Taken together these categories of requirements are often called the
"context of use".  Ultimately the stakeholders associated with a
particular digital system want that system to be "successful". Success,
however, can only be identified and measured if requirements such as
these are identified and, ideally, specified. The key measure of a digital
system is whether it fits its context of use: whether the people for
whom it is designed can use it with acceptable levels of usability, for
the tasks that they need to do, in the social setting in which these tasks
take place, using the technologies they have available.

We argue that only by taking this approach - by considering the
context of use - can meaningful and productive discussions be
conducted about the accessibility or usability of a system. Using
context of use as a benchmark for success also eliminates the illogical
situation in which some commentators reject sites that are usable by
disabled people i.e. fit the context of use but do not meet specific Web
Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG -
http://www.w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT/ )
conformance levels. Appropriate "fit to context of use" should be the
goal of developers, with a recognition that guidelines can serve as
means to this end, but that conformance to guidelines is not itself the
end.

NOTE: This is an edited extract from 'Contextual Web Accessibility -
Maximizing the Benefit of Accessibility Guidelines', by Brian Kelly,
David Sloan, Andy Heath, Helen Petrie, Fraser Hamilton, and Lawrie
Phipps. The full paper is available here:
http://www.ukoln.ac.uk/web-focus/papers/w4a-2006/w4a-2006-
contextual-accessibility.doc .
[Section Four ends].

++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2006 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Additional reporting - Yasmin Foster and Grace Geilinger
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
