+++E-ACCESS BULLETIN.
- ISSUE 77, MAY 2006.

Technology news for people with vision impairment
( http://www.headstar.com/eab/ ).
Sponsored by RNIB ( http://www.rnib.org.uk ).

NOTE: Please forward this free bulletin to others (subscription details
at the end). We conform to the accessible Text Email Newsletter
(TEN) Standard:
http://www.headstar.com/ten/ .


++Issue 77 Contents.

Section One: News.

01: User Experience Core To Updated Web Accessibility Guidelines
- web designers to receive clearer guidance.

02: Mobile Journey Planner Under Development
- trials for accessible route finding device begin this summer.

03: Accessible Multifunction Device To Launch This Year
- digital TV and radio, CD player and DAISY player in one.

04: Double Launch For Accessibility Boosting Campaigns
- top 10 'reasonable adjustments' and inclusive IT charter drawn up.

News in Brief: 05: First Award - company receives web accreditation;
06: Access Calls - Voice over IP phone tutorial; 07: Testing, Testing -
access tool update.

Section Two: 'The Inbox' - Readers' Forum.
08: Cost Analysis - assistive technology cost debate; 09: Broadcast
News - digital TV query response; 10: Listen Up - audio description
offer.

Section Three: Focus - Web Accessibility
11: Conducting Effective User Testing: Lack of user testing by people
with a disability ahead of product and service launches has long been
the bugbear of disability lobbyists, organisations and vision impaired
people. Stefan Haselwimmer reports on how the Usability Exchange
addresses this missing link.

Section Four: Opinion - Free and Open Source Software
12: Opening Minds: There is a deep chasm between people with a
disability and the community advocating free and open source
software, which allows source codes to be shared, writes Marco
Fioretti. To unite them, he says more public funding and more
communication between the two parties is required.

[Contents ends].


++Special Notice: 'e-Access '06' - Technology For All
- Early Bird Offer Until 30 June
- 14 September 2006, Central London
- http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess06/

'e-Access'06' is the UK's leading annual event on access to all
technologies, including internet, PCs, mobile phones and digital TV
and radio, by people with disabilities and people of all abilities.

The conference focuses on how digital technology is enabling people
with disabilities to achieve greater independence. It also looks at the
problems people face with access to technology including accessible
banking and broadcasting. Sponsors include BSkyB, Jadu and Ford.

Places normally cost 195 pounds plus VAT for public sector, 295
pounds plus VAT for private sector and 145 pounds plus VAT for
small charities and not for profit organisations (turnover below
300,000 pounds). However if you register before 1 July you will save
50 pounds per delegate by typing 'eb-offer' after your name. For more
information see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/eaccess06/ .

[Special notice ends].


++Section One: News.

+01: User Experience Core To Updated Web Accessibility Guidelines.

A more structured approach to user experience, based around precise
tests that help translate user feedback into accessible web design, is at
the centre of new guidelines being drawn up by the Web Accessibility
Initiative of the World Wide Web Consortium
( WAI - http://www.w3.org/WAI/ ).

The updated Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
( WCAG 2.0 - http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag20.php )
will lay out a practical approach for including feedback from users,
giving web designers clearer guidance on improving accessibility
during the design process, E-Access Bulletin has learned. "The
normative portion of WCAG 2.0 is the 'success criteria'. The success  
criteria are designed to be precisely testable, while the checkpoints in
WCAG 1.0 were not," Judy Brewer, director of the Web Accessibility
Initiative told E-Access Bulletin.

The checkpoints in WCAG 1.0 make design recommendations, such as
"Use navigation mechanisms in a consistent manner", but they don't
provide much detailed help for designers needing to assess the results
of implementing these recommendations. "We are developing tests for
the implementation techniques associated with WCAG 2.0 success
criteria. Our goal is to enable more reliable assessment of conformance
to WCAG 2.0," she said. The only test procedures laid down in WCAG
1.0 are for automated checking tools, rather than human users.

The new guidelines also have a much wider scope than those they
replace, according to Brewer. "Given the rapid and continuing
evolution of web technologies, the WAI felt it would be most valuable
to develop a guideline for web content accessibility that could apply
across all web technologies," she said. "The Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines 1.0 had focused mainly on HTML, as do many other
locally-developed web accessibility guidelines," she explained.

The first version of the standard, WCAG 1.0, was released in 1999, so
updated guidelines are needed to make sure that work on accessibility
keeps pace with innovations in technology. According to Brewer, the
long wait is partly due to wider scope and greater detail in WCAG 2.0,
and the WAI team have also consulted widely on the new guidelines
she said. "We've sought extensive input from users of WCAG 1.0
around the world during the development of WCAG 2.0. Again, while
this has added to the development timeline, we feel that this will help
us meet the goal of developing a guideline which can become a
convergence target for harmonisation of standards on web
accessibility," she said.

At present, WAI is requesting public feedback on the latest draft of
WCAG 2.0 by the end of May
( http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/w3c-wai-
ig/2006AprJun/0023.html ).
A final release date for the new guidelines has yet to be fixed.
According to Brewer this is because the results of the public
consultation need to be absorbed and an amended draft drawn up, and
then W3C will examine the proposed new guidelines before giving
them its final stamp of approval.


+03: Mobile Journey Planner Under Development.

A device providing personalised journey planning aimed at passengers
with a disability is under development and will be tested by vision
impaired people in England and Ireland this Summer.

The project team is developing a personal digital assistant (PDA) with
built-in mobile phone and audio output aimed at people with mobility
impairments to guide users to and from public transport networks and
enable them to request accessible travel information on the move.
'MAPPED,'
(http://www.bmt.org/brochures/Focus%20Issue%202%202005.pdf)
a three-year European Commission funded programme, uses software
that runs both on a central server and on the PDA. The servers and
client "talk" to each other over the General Packet Radio System
(GPRS) mobile phone network.
"Typically a user will enter the start and end points of a route they
want to travel along into the PDA. MAPPED will know where the user
is because it contains a handheld geolocation receiver that
communicates with satellites. It will then suggest a route and at all
times send accessibility information relevant to their location."
There are also plans for the device to allow users to make advance
bookings for assistance at underground stations, for example, possibly
via SMS text sent from the device.

"Public transport is notoriously underused by people with a disability,"
research scientist Dr Gary Randall of British Maritime Technology
(BMT -
http://www.bmt.org/ ),
developing the device, told delegates at this month's seminar on
location-based services for people with a disability
(http://www.tiresias.org/phoneability/seminar_location_based_services
.htm )
hosted by PhoneAbility
( http://www.tiresias.org/phoneability/ ).

According to Randall, when it comes to journey planning there is a
lack of accessible information for passengers with a disability. "The
combination of services that MAPPED offers is new - all types of
routing and accessibility information and reservation-making."

But digital maps do not currently include information needed by
people with mobility impairments on steps, road gradients doorways,
paths and lifts for example. "Maps need augmenting to include
information we need," Randall said. "It's been a real slog to get the
data together and handle the complexity of that data," Randall said.
Eventually, the device will enable users to add relevant details to maps
as they encounter them.

Following trials in Dublin in Ireland and Winchester in England,
further tests will take place in Barcelona, Spain and Genoa, Italy, in co-
operation with European mobility project ASK-IT
( http://www.ask-it.org/ ).


+02: Accessible Multifunction Device To Launch This Year.

A product providing access to a wide range of digital media all in one
package is set to launch by the end of this year. The Digital Media
Centre combines the functions of a Freeview digital TV set-top box,
digital radio tuner, and disc player and recorder.

The Digital Media Centre, developed by Portset Systems
( http://www.portset.co.uk/pdmc.htm ),
provides access to electronic programme guides in audio or on-screen
formats, audio-described TV and DVD content, audio CDs and talking
books in the Daisy format. The system can be used with or without a
TV set. A hard drive is built into the system, enabling users to record
up to 100 hours of TV content directly, or to pause live TV content and
resume where they left off.

As well as recording onto the internal hard drive, users can record onto
audio CDs. For users with partial vision, Digital Media Centre can be
connected to a TV, accessing programme guides on-screen as well as
via an audio output provided by a synthetic voice. Users can adjust the
size and colour of the on-screen display to suit their needs.

These features add to the functionality of an earlier model that has
been available since January this year. According to Graham Thomas,
chief executive of Portset Systems, the new features were prompted by
feedback from users. "We've had a large order book since we
launched, and some very useful comments from customers," he said.
According to Thomas, the new Digital Media Centre will retail at
around 900 pounds.

At present, the other option for users needing audio-described digital
TV content via Freeview is the Netgem i-Player, a set-top box that
doesn't have the Digital Media Centre's range of functions.

Availability of audio described content via digital TV is one of the
issues covered by a public consultation run by the regulator Ofcom on
access to broadcast services. The closing date for responses is 8 June
2006. For more information see:
http://www.ofcom.org.uk/consult/condocs/accessservs/access.pdf .


+04: Double Launch For Accessibility Boosting Campaigns.  

Efforts to communicate the basic points of good practice in technology
design to a wider audience have been boosted by the launch this month
of two initiatives aiming to bring users, policymakers, and the private
sector together.

On 5 May, 2080partners,
( http://www.2080partners.com/ ),
a group that includes the British Dyslexia Association, launched the
Well Adjusted Campaign, which aims to draw up a list of the top 10
reasonable adjustments that will improve the accessibility of web sites.

The campaign will consult with accessibility experts and the private
sector to draw up good practice guidelines that are effective, but easy
to understand. "We're aiming at people who want to do it, but find
accessibility scary and complicated," said Sally Hayward of the
2080partners team.

Separately, a group of organisations including The Royal National
Institute for Deaf People ( RNID -
http://www.rnid.org.uk/ )
is launching an initiative to draft a 'charter for disabled people and
ICT'. The initiative, which launched on 15 May at a Parliamentary
reception, aims to draw on a broad range of consultees to raise
awareness of inclusive design and identify its key principles. The end
result will be a statement that is easy to understand and can fit on a
single sheet of paper.

The project is funded by the Alliance for Digital Inclusion, a pan-
industry body focused on the wider impact of ICTs in society. A web
site has been set up for discussion and feedback at:
http://www.itenables.info  


++News in Brief:

+05: First Award: Insurance company UnumProvident has become the
first UK company web site to be awarded with recently-formed web
accessibility accreditation 'See It Right: UseAbility.' The award,
which appears as a logo on the web site, is presented following RNIB's
accessibility audit and checks by UK disability technology charity
AbilityNet's panel of people with disabilities:
http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/content/oneoffs/sir_unum.htm .

+06: Access Calls: An audio tutorial on how to use voice over IP
(VoIP) internet telephone service Skype has been released. Topics
covered include: downloading and installing Skype, integrating Skype
into e-mail, audio conferencing, text chat, obtaining a Skype account,
installing the latest JAWS scripts for Skype and calling contacts with a
single key press from anywhere in Windows. Jonathan Mosen's
tutorial is available from his web site, and costs around eight pounds:
http://www.mosen.org/sos/ .

+07: Testing Testing: Eleven languages have been added to the
updated version of a manual web accessibility evaluation tool, the
'Web Accessibility Toolbar' version 1.2. Launched by blindness
organisation Vision Australia, the toolbar is free to download and
install and is now available in Portuguese, German and Japanese,
among others: http://www.visionaustralia.org.au/info.aspx?page=614 .

[Section One ends].


++Special Notice: Building the Perfect Council Web Site
- An E-Government Bulletin/Socitm Seminar
- 11 July, Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), London.

A partnership between E-Access Bulletin sister publication E-
Government Bulletin and the Society of IT Management's Socitm
Insight Programme, this conference will attempt to encapsulate every
aspect of how to create the perfect council web site: accessible, easy to
use and compelling.

The event will draw on the collected wisdom of seven years of
Socitm's annual 'Better Connected' review of all UK council web sites,
bringing together experts and practitioners to share tips and warn
against pitfalls. Registration costs just 125 pounds for delegates from
Socitm Insight subscriber authorities; 195 pounds for other public
sector delegates and 295 pounds for private sector delegates (all rates
exclude VAT).

For more information and to register see:
http://www.headstar-events.com/council/ .

[Special Notice ends].


++Section Two: 'The Inbox'
- Readers' Forum.

Please email all contributions or responses to
inbox@headstar.com .

+08: Cost Analysis: In response to Fay Rohrlach's contribution on the
high cost of assistive technology in the March issue of E-Access
Bulletin, Stefan Slucki from South Australia writes: "It's a no-brainer
that Fay 's call for less expensive, quality assistive technology products
sounds appealing.

"Rather than stop at stating this truism, I'd like to suggest that
blindness agencies and assistive technology manufacturers be
encouraged to provide no or low-interest loans or instalment plans to
enable more visually-impaired potential customers to purchase quality
equipment. This would both expand their market and maintain a
responsible attitude to the equipment by those benefiting from it.

"Complacency in the assistive technology manufacturing community
has set in due to the development of government sponsorship for work-
related technology-device purchases, but a significant group of
visually-impaired people has yet to be seriously considered as potential
customers."
[please send further comments to: inbox@headstar.com]

Brian Williams from London also writes in response to Fay's
comments: "There was a time when, to listen to an audio book you
needed a gadget to play records. Today you need a cassette player, a
DAISY player or DAISY software to play the books on your computer
and some sort of software to enable your computer to talk you, such as
JAWS.

"If you want to take your audio books with you on your travels you
need an accessible MP3 player. Here in the UK the RNIB are to start
selling an accessible MP3 player costing over 200 pounds. You can
buy a player which has the same capacity on the open market for less
than 30 pounds.

"How can this situation be justified? I know companies are not
charities but the general public see all this wonderful technology and
think our lives are being improved. How many of these international
specialised technology companies offer an extended purchasing option
enabling blind people to spread the cost over 12 months or more? Even
if they did, we still pay much more for access to equipment than our
sighted counterparts.

"It's like having a wheelchair salesroom at the top of a flight of steps
and you can have one providing you buy some equipment to get you
up the steps."
[further responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+09: Broadcast News: Leen Petre, Head of Broadcasting and Talking
Images at RNIB writes in response to Roger Petersen from the US
about his comments (E-Access Bulletin, February 2006), on improving
access for blind people in the US to television. "The consumer expert
group on digital switchover in the UK has produced a set of
requirements for a digital TV system that would be fully accessible to
older people and people with a range of impairments, including visual
impairments. There is no equipment on the market at the moment that
meets all these requirements, but it gives a good specification to put to
manufacturers should your organisation wish to work with
manufacturers directly. The document can be found on the RNIB
website at:
www.rnib.org.uk/audiodescription
under the heading 'our campaign for accessible TV.' I hope this helps."
[Further responses to inbox@headstar.com].


+10: Listen Up: YourLocalCinema.com, the industry-sponsored group
responsible for publicising audio description for films, would like
vision impaired people to give their views on cinemas' audio
description. "The results of the survey will be presented to the cinema
industry," says Editor of 'YourLocalCinema.com' Derek Brandon.
"Please take a minute to complete the accessible online survey here:
http://www.yourlocalcinema.com/survey.itfc.ad.html .
Completed entries will be entered into a draw, with a prize of two free
cinema passes to any Vue, Odeon or UCI cinema. There are 10 sets of
two passes up for grabs."
[Responses to inbox@headstar.com].

[Section Two ends].


++Sponsored Notice: QAC Sight Village 2005
- Birmingham, UK
- 18-20 July 2006

The latest in cutting edge technology for people who are blind or
partially sighted will be on show this July at Sight Village at Queen
Alexandra College in Birmingham.

Now in its thirteenth year, the event includes presentations covering
tactile graphics and employment as well as panel discussions and high
quality displays from companies and organisations from around the
world and all over the UK. Sighted guides and tactile maps will
be available for delegates.

Registration for this major international exhibition is free. For details
and to register go to:
http://www.viewplus.com/sightvillage-registration/

[Sponsored Notice ends].


++Special Notice: Support Our Katie!

On Friday 26 May E-Government Bulletin's Marketing Assistant Katie
Wilkinson  is embarking on a charity walk from Brighton to London to
raise money for Marie Curie Cancer Care. The walk is approximately
50 miles and will take two days to complete while wearing hideous
yellow jumpers and waving around buckets to collect donations along
the way!

To help make the sore feet bearable, and support this fantastic charity
please sponsor them and visit:
http://www.justgiving.com/brightontolondonwalk .

[Special Notice ends].

Section Three: Focus
- Web Accessibility

+11: Conducting Effective User Testing
by Stefan Haselwimmer

Following the publication of British Standards Institution's (BSI)
'Publicly available specification' PAS 78
( http://www.bsi-global.com/ICT/PAS78/index.xalter )
accessibility guidelines earlier this year, web site accessibility is now
as much about disabled-user testing as Web Accessibility Initiative
(WAI -
http://www.w3.org/WAI/ )
compliance.

A web site can pass all WAI accessibility checkpoints but still be
unusable by disabled people, so disabled-user testing is necessary to
ensure web sites are genuinely accessible. By testing your web site
with a range of disabled users you can also get a powerful sense of
how technical accessibility issues affect people with different
disabilities.

The PAS 78 'Guide to good practice in commissioning accessible web
sites' outlines the benefits of disabled-user testing and provides useful
guidance on how to conduct web site usability testing with disabled
people. But significant work is still required to carry out the testing
itself, in terms of recruiting disabled users, administering tests and
compiling final results. Web site usability testing with a range of
disabled users is therefore rarely carried out by most organisations - it
is either too time-consuming to carry out in-house or there is
insufficient budget to pay an external consultancy to carry out the
work.

We launched the Usability Exchange
(http://www.usabilityexchange.com )
in March of this year to overcome many of the problems faced by
organisations wishing to conduct disabled-user testing. The Usability
Exchange provides a database of both experienced and inexperienced
disabled people, as well as an entire usability-testing platform for
administering usability tests and collecting results. The time and
expense associated with carrying out usability tests is considerably
reduced, making it cost-effective for organisations to conduct regular
usability testing for the first time.

Within the Usability Exchange disabled testers carry out tests remotely
using their own computer equipment, at a time when they are most
comfortable - organisations therefore receive high-quality feedback in
a matter of days rather than weeks. Organisations can also
communicate directly with disabled testers to resolve accessibility or
usability problems, or to organise on-site usability tests. If necessary,
organisations can also watch testers attempt web site tasks through the
use of remote viewing software.

A number of different usability tests can be created within the
Usability Exchange depending on the experience of the organisation
concerned. For organisations that have never conducted usability tests
before, the Usability Exchange's 'Starter' test provides a basic
indication of the usability of a web site for a range of disabled users.
Large organisations with their own in-house accessibility or usability
experts can create 'Advanced' tests with a variable number of tasks,
questions, and testers. For public sector bodies, the Usability Exchange
offers a special "Public Sector Package", a cost-effective package of
products and services for organisations who require regular, high-
quality disabled-user testing.

The Usability Exchange can also help with the process of consulting
disabled people - a key recommendation of PAS 78 is that
organisations should consult disabled people at the beginning of the
web development lifecycle. The Disability Equality Duty also requires
public bodies to involve disabled users when developing online
services. Through the Usability Exchange, organisations can submit
questionnaires to a large number of disabled people or invite local
disabled users to focus groups.

Prices for Usability Exchange tests start at 299 pounds. Web design
companies or accessibility consultancies intending to submit a large
number of tests through the Usability Exchange can sign up as
"Premium Partners" to receive significant discounts on all submitted
tests. Premium partners are also included in the Usability Exchange's
"Premium Partner Network", a database of organisations offering
accessibility and usability-related services to customers who may
require them.

By using our existing database of disabled testers, we plan to provide
manual WAI-compliance checking in the near future, our ultimate goal
is to provide a one-stop shop for all organisations requiring
accessibility and usability services. Towards the end of 2006, we also
hope to launch the Usability Exchange in the US and in selected
European countries.

NOTE: Stefan Haselwimmer is Managing Director of the Usability
Exchange.

[Section Three ends]


++Section Four: Focus
- Open Source Software

+12: Opening Minds
by Marco Fioretti

Accessibility is an increasingly important issue for free and open
source software (FOSS) developers and advocates. The International
Organization for Standardisation (ISO) has developed standards for
ensuring that software is accessible to people with disabilities.
Governments around the world often require that software procured for
public use must meet accessibility standards.

Disabled users and the FOSS community, however, still have a serious
communication problem. The need for better communication between
the FOSS community and disability advocates emerged last year, when
government officials in Massachusetts announced their intention to use
OASIS Open Document Format for Office Applications or
'OpenDocument' (for more on this, see E-Access Bulletin, January
2006, issue 73). This is a well-documented, rich file format that can be
used with any software program. Currently, OpenDocument is
undergoing an accessibility review process and some of its components
have already passed World Wide Web Consortium's (W3C) Web
Accessibility Initiative (WAI) requirements.

FOSS supporters celebrated the announcement, noting the switch
would reduce public expenditure, guarantee perpetual access to data,
and end discrimination. But they were unprepared for criticism from
disability organisations, such as the Texas-based Disability Policy
Consortium (DPC) and the Bay State Council for the Blind (BSCB) in
Massachusetts.

To address this imbalance, FOSS and industry representatives met last
November with Massachusetts officials and representatives from
disability rights groups. The meeting revealed that the FOSS
community fails to understand or appreciate the needs of disabled
users, and that the disability community lacks interest in FOSS.

At the meeting, FOSS advocates explained the relationship between
the Open Document Format, open standards, and accessibility
standards and outlined the technical limitations of proprietary software
such as Microsoft's products. They maintained accessibility in
Microsoft Office has often been the result of reverse engineering,
which must be done with each new release using tools from third-party
vendors. They also pointed out the adoption of a FOSS-based
accessibility infrastructure would open more jobs to disabled users, in
positions such as Unix systems administration and web site design.
But it didn't matter. Disability advocates confirmed the position
expressed in a Joint Statement on OpenSource and OpenDocuments as
follows:
  without advanced training to develop a qualified pool of
talent, new employees at state government agencies with OpenSource,
OpenDocument (ODF) platforms will be used by everybody but people
with disabilities because of perceived or real training requirements.

The disabled users at the meeting summarized their position: "Variety
is bad, we don't want to have to change." Even if Office 12 (the
updated version of Microsoft Office due for release later this year) will
force them to change anyway, the disabled representatives request that,
as a minimum, "all ODF applications have common functionality and
[...] the same keyboard shortcuts".

FOSS developers strive to meet accessibility standards. The web site
OpenOffice.org is compatible with the JAWS screen reader, though
problems remain. Also, the Free Standards Group's Accessibility
Workgroup (FSGA) has asked for feedback on drafts of accessibility
standards for Linux and Unix.

Computer science student Fabrizio Marini feels the situation is far
from optimal. To install Linux, the only solution for him is to find
somebody without impaired vision who is willing to do it for him.
"Most Linux documentation is still too technical and difficult for
newbies," Marini said. For blind users, there is the added burden of
dealing with resources that aren't accessible, including, ironically,
some online documentation for Linux-compatible assistive
technologies. Marini has also been relying on the GNU and Linux Free
Information Technology guide ("Appunti di Informatica Libera") that
is an astonishing 8,839 pages long. Marini is testing speech synthesis
and screen reader programs for Linux.

Many projects seem to start with ambitious goals and then stop more or
less half way before being really usable. In my opinion, developers
need to focus on less products.
Both in Europe and the US, there is still much to do to reconcile
disabled users and the FOSS community. Disabled users fail to
perceive that they have the same needs and rights as everybody else,
including full control of, and long term access to, government and their
own private documents; or the fact that some types of software can
create local jobs for them.

In the meantime, the most urgent task is to improve documentation.
Local Linux User Groups could organize ways to connect volunteers to
assist disabled users with installations. FOSS advocates should contact
local disability rights groups to let them know what they're doing. They
may also be able to provide more feedback about needs in your
community.

We need to lobby for more public funding for research projects that
advance the development of the FOSS accessibility infrastructure. We
also need to move towards mandating that only accessibility software
working with OpenOffice.org and Linux can be purchased with public
money. If you have other suggestions, I welcome them.

There is no doubt that current FOSS-only platforms are not ready for
many disabled users. Disabled users may be helping the FOSS
community, or at least a large part of it, to finally acknowledge a
general attitude problem.

NOTE: This article was originally published in the publication
Newsforge:
(http://software.newsforge.com/software/06/03/13/1628249.shtml?tid=150
 ) Marco Fioretti is an OpenDocument Fellowship Committee Member
( http://opendocumentfellowship.org/Profiles/MarcoFioretti )

[Section Four ends].


++Special Notice: Web Accessibility Forum.

Accessify Forum is a discussion forum devoted to all topics relating to
web accessibility. Topics cover everything from 'Beginners' and 'Site
building and testing' through to projects such as the new accessibility
testing tool WaiZilla and the accessibility of the open source forum
software itself.

All you need to register is a working email address, so come along and
join in the fun at:
http://www.accessifyforum.com .

[Special notice ends].


++End Notes.

+How to Receive the Bulletin.

To subscribe to this free monthly bulletin, email
eab-subs@headstar.com with 'subscribe eab' in the subject header.
You can list other email addresses to subscribe in the body of the
message. Please encourage all your colleagues to sign up! To
unsubscribe at any time, put 'unsubscribe eab' in the subject header.

Please send comments on coverage or leads to Dan Jellinek at:
dan@headstar.com .

Copyright 2006 Headstar Ltd http://www.headstar.com .
The Bulletin may be reproduced as long as all parts including this
copyright notice are included, and as long as people are always
encouraged to subscribe with us individually by email. Please also
inform the editor when you are reproducing our content. Sections of
the bulletin may be quoted as long as they are clearly sourced as 'taken
from e-access bulletin, a free monthly email newsletter', and our web
site address http://www.headstar.com/eab is also cited.

+Personnel:
Editor - Dan Jellinek
Deputy editor - Derek Parkinson
Senior reporter - Mel Poluck
Technical advisor - Nick Apostolidis
Editorial advisor - Kevin Carey.

ISSN 1476-6337 .

[Issue ends.]
